[Amit Varma]: The world has changed forever and we will spend the next few years haunted by regrets
[Amit Varma]: and thoughts of what might have been. Maybe we will regret spending too little time with
[Amit Varma]: loved ones. Maybe we will regret spending too much time with them. Maybe we will regret
[Amit Varma]: taking good health and long life for granted and not doing all that we could have. We will
[Amit Varma]: cross off items from our bucket list, sacrificing those dreams forever, such as those that involve
[Amit Varma]: travel. And we will wonder why we didn't appreciate more the beauty of noses and lips as those
[Amit Varma]: parts of the face hidden from view in public due to an evolving custom become erogenous
[Amit Varma]: zones for the kids born today. And everyone who is making decisions of public policy will
[Amit Varma]: have more than just personal regrets to contend with. They will also have to deal with the
[Amit Varma]: decisions that they took today in this turbulent time of COVID-19 with all their costs, with
[Amit Varma]: all their lives lost. This is true regardless of what that decision might be. Every single
[Amit Varma]: decision, in fact, is a devil's alternative. Many of the costs will be seen. Many of the
[Amit Varma]: benefits will be unseen. Please indulge me while I elaborate on this with the example
[Amit Varma]: of whether to do a lockdown or not. In early March, a policymaker in India would have looked
[Amit Varma]: at the trajectory of COVID-19 and other countries and been alarmed. It would seem that if the
[Amit Varma]: pandemic took off in India, it would be worse than anywhere else. Our poor, many of them
[Amit Varma]: trapped in congested cities would suffer the most. To add to which is the fact that Indians
[Amit Varma]: have more comorbidities or other existing illnesses like diabetes, more than people
[Amit Varma]: from other countries. Our healthcare services are far worse than countries in the developed
[Amit Varma]: world like Italy, Spain, and the USA, which have since been overwhelmed. You cannot think
[Amit Varma]: of herd immunity as a way out, as the UK briefly considered, because that would require around
[Amit Varma]: 60% of the population to get the disease. And even at a conservative mortality estimate
[Amit Varma]: of 0.5%, that would mean 40 lakh people dead. As a policymakers then, what are the options
[Amit Varma]: you have? Sure, you can ramp up testing and tracing, but there isn't enough state capacity
[Amit Varma]: for that at that moment. Your best tool seems to be the blunt tool of a lockdown. Social
[Amit Varma]: distancing should at least flatten the curve, as the phrase goes, so things don't go out
[Amit Varma]: of hand while you build the state capacity to deal with the outbreaks that will occur
[Amit Varma]: later. The problem here is that this decision carries huge costs, and you cannot calculate
[Amit Varma]: them. As we have seen, there will be enormous suffering among migrant labor who are stuck
[Amit Varma]: in inhospitable cities, often without food and water. As the economy is suspended, businesses
[Amit Varma]: across the country will shut down, jobs will be lost, livelihoods will be destroyed. We
[Amit Varma]: know that for every 1% rise in GDP, 2 million people come out of poverty. So what is the
[Amit Varma]: cost of dropping several points of GDP growth, even possibly going into recession? What is
[Amit Varma]: the cost to the poor, especially? Not only can we not calculate the first order effects
[Amit Varma]: of a lockdown now, but even second order effects down the line. And even if we estimate the
[Amit Varma]: gains from a lockdown now, we cannot estimate second order gains down the line from the
[Amit Varma]: productivity that would come from the lives saved. So whether or not you choose to go
[Amit Varma]: in for a lockdown, the costs of the action will be seen and the benefits will be unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Whatever you do, future generations can easily blame you in hindsight for making a mistake.
[Amit Varma]: Sitting at a distance, a commentator like me can appreciate the complexity of all this
[Amit Varma]: and refrain from making a decision or recording an episode. But in the thick of things, there
[Amit Varma]: are people who have to decide and who know that whatever they decide, many, many people
[Amit Varma]: will die because of what they do. Welcome to the scene and the unseen. When COVID-19
[Amit Varma]: broke, there was huge popular demand on Twitter for me to do an episode on it. I refrained
[Amit Varma]: because I felt, as I feel, that we are in the fog of war, so to say, in terms of information.
[Amit Varma]: We do not know enough about the virus. We don't understand so many policy implications.
[Amit Varma]: And most experts I know are struggling to get a grip on things. I like to do timeless
[Amit Varma]: episodes that can be heard 30 years from now, that are a definitive guide to the subject
[Amit Varma]: at hand. When the two political crisis of last year broke, the abolition of Article
[Amit Varma]: 370 in Kashmir and the introduction of CAA, I took my time and recorded what I think of
[Amit Varma]: as fairly definitive episodes on them, which will stand the test of time. I cannot offer
[Amit Varma]: you something like that for COVID-19 right now. But it is too important and too consequential
[Amit Varma]: for me to ignore. And I do spend a lot of time thinking about it and worrying about
[Amit Varma]: it. So I finally decided to put together this episode with my friend and frequent guest,
[Amit Varma]: the economist Shruti Rajgopalan, who has thought deeply about this crisis and written many
[Amit Varma]: thousands of words on it. We will not discuss the scientific and epidemiological aspects
[Amit Varma]: of it in detail, because we are not experts of that and we are not fans of bringing it.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, we will talk about the policy aspects, the economic aspects, and the philosophical
[Amit Varma]: dilemma of figuring out what the right decision can possibly be. We are recording this in
[Amit Varma]: the early hours of April 17th, India time. And I'd like to add three things here. One,
[Amit Varma]: I had put in a spurt of recording for this podcast in February, and I've banked episodes
[Amit Varma]: till the start of June. I'll continue releasing them after this one and we'll wait to do deeper
[Amit Varma]: episodes on COVID-19 when the dust settles. Two, I'm recording this episode for the first
[Amit Varma]: time from my home using the app Zencaster to connect remotely with Shruti. So apologies
[Amit Varma]: in advance if there are issues with the sound. Three, there are many podcasters out there
[Amit Varma]: who are doing a much better job of speaking about this pandemic than I can. This lockdown
[Amit Varma]: is a great time to discover new podcasts. So please check those out. One that I liked
[Amit Varma]: in particular is by the data journalist Rukmini S, who tweets at the handle of at Rukmini.
[Amit Varma]: She's done a series of great episodes on COVID-19. They are linked from her Twitter page. The
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila folks have done some very good episodes of All Things Policy, their daily
[Amit Varma]: policy podcast. Do search for that and check that out. The formidable Neha Matthews is
[Amit Varma]: also doing great work at Indian Express Podcast, specifically a podcast called Three Things.
[Amit Varma]: Check them out as well. Among people whose Twitter streams I have been following and
[Amit Varma]: have learned from a lot in the last few days are Balaji S Rinevasan, at Balaji S, Max Roser
[Amit Varma]: at Max C Roser and Anoop Mallani at Anoop underscore Mallani. Before we begin our conversation
[Amit Varma]: today though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoy listening to The Scene and the Unseen, you can play a part in keeping the
[Amit Varma]: show alive. The Scene and the Unseen has been a labour of love for me. I've enjoyed putting
[Amit Varma]: together many stimulating conversations, expanding my brain and my universe, and hopefully yours
[Amit Varma]: as well. But while the work has been its own reward, I don't actually make much money off
[Amit Varma]: the show. Although The Scene and the Unseen has great numbers, advertisers haven't really
[Amit Varma]: woken up to the insane engagement level of podcasts. I do many, many hours of deep research
[Amit Varma]: for each episode, besides all the logistics of producing the show myself, scheduling guests,
[Amit Varma]: booking studios, paying technicians, the travel and so on. So well, I'm trying a new way of
[Amit Varma]: keeping this thing going, and that involves you. My proposition for you is this. For every
[Amit Varma]: episode of The Scene and the Unseen that you enjoy, buy me a cup of coffee, or even a lavish
[Amit Varma]: lunch, whatever you feel it's worth. You can do this by heading over to sceneunseen.in
[Amit Varma]: slash support and contributing an amount of your choice. This is not a subscription. The
[Amit Varma]: Scene and the Unseen will continue to be free on all podcast apps and at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: This is just a gesture of appreciation. Help keep the scene going. sceneunseen.in slash
[Amit Varma]: support.
[Amit Varma]: Shruti, welcome to The Scene and the Unseen.
[Guest]: Hi, Amit. It is so nice to hear your voice.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And you know, while we had gone for the break, dear listener, Shruti told me why
[Amit Varma]: was I so dead serious? And why could I not make Rajma jokes like I did during our episode
[Amit Varma]: on the Bhopal gas tragedy? But these are not exactly very funny times. How has the lockdown
[Guest]: been for you?
[Guest]: I'm embarrassed to say it's been very comfortable. You know, I'm one of the privileged few who
[Guest]: lives in a very low density and safe and clean environment. I live in Arlington, Virginia.
[Guest]: And I live with my favorite human and my favorite dog. And it's been very calm. And you know,
[Guest]: luckily, we are not struggling for essential supplies. Our fridge is stocked, you know,
[Guest]: the dog just keeps us in good cheer. We have excellent internet. So all work continues,
[Guest]: you know, as usual. And I work with a really great group of people who've all adjusted
[Guest]: to this new situation beautifully. So there's been no stress on that end. I guess the only
[Guest]: stress is when one thinks about COVID and writes about COVID and what's going on globally.
[Guest]: It's just, you know, the lack of good news. It's just relentless right now. Anytime you
[Guest]: look up anything, it's more bad news. And you know, terrible things are happening across
[Guest]: the world to people. So that has been the only hard part so far. What about you?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I have also been extremely lucky. Like, you know, you and I just live such privileged
[Amit Varma]: lives that we have no business complaining about small things here and there. And you
[Amit Varma]: know, that brings me to a thought that I shall probably come back to closer to the end of
[Amit Varma]: the episode about how one of the trends that we are seeing is that a lot of the less fortunate
[Amit Varma]: people, a lot of the poorer people are looking at this lockdown as a measure of the elites
[Amit Varma]: to protect themselves, while the poor suffer the brunt of it. And it's very easily understandable,
[Amit Varma]: of course, why they think like that. And, you know, and we'll probably come back to
[Amit Varma]: that a little later in the episode. But what I sort of wanted to kind of start chatting
[Amit Varma]: with you about was that one, you've been working incredibly hard through this crisis, you've
[Amit Varma]: done a couple of papers, you've written at least three columns, your alignment column
[Amit Varma]: about this whole crisis. And you were one of the very early clear voices calling for
[Amit Varma]: a lockdown. Now, before we get to that specific decision, tell me a little bit about your
[Amit Varma]: framework of thinking about public policy in times like this. Like, how do you think
[Amit Varma]: about policy when you think about what we should do and what we should not do? It seems
[Amit Varma]: to me that normally, you'd be looking at policy from a point of view of saying, these are
[Amit Varma]: the costs, these are the benefits, these are the probable costs and the probable benefits
[Amit Varma]: and you apply all the principles you know, from your knowledge in different fields. But
[Amit Varma]: over here, there seems to be this great fog, where, you know, we can't imagine what the
[Amit Varma]: cost could be of doing this or that. And, you know, we are sort of playing around with
[Amit Varma]: so little information, and there is so much at stake. So how do you think about this at
[Amit Varma]: a meta level?
[Guest]: So honestly, I find it very difficult to put on a different hat from the one I feel like
[Guest]: I always wear, which is the economist hat. So you know, many of your listeners know this
[Guest]: from my previous visits on the show, but I'm an economist by training. I think about pretty
[Guest]: much everything in life in my work as a set of trade-offs, because that's the core fundamental
[Guest]: idea when we think like economists. So what are the trade-offs and opportunity costs which
[Guest]: are hidden or visible in any particular situation? The other hat that I wear is someone who's
[Guest]: familiar with Indian political economy. So most of my work has been in the area of public
[Guest]: choice, law and economics, and constitutional economics. And that kind of training and looking
[Guest]: at the Indian system over the last decade has given me insight into a whole range of
[Guest]: issues. You know, you and I have done episodes on the Bhopal gas tragedy, we've talked about
[Guest]: labor law, we've talked about, you know, urban and rural municipal governance. So we've talked
[Guest]: about property rights. So just given the kind of work that I do, I have had like, you know,
[Guest]: just a good fortune of looking at different aspects of Indian political economy, all of
[Guest]: it as an economist. And when COVID started coming about in different parts of the world,
[Guest]: and one could see that this is a pandemic, which could be on a global scale, I used the
[Guest]: same set of tools that I have always used to study this problem. So you know, I'm not
[Guest]: thinking about this from a medicine point of view, I have absolutely no training in
[Guest]: medicine, epidemiology, you know, microbiology, virology, nothing. So please don't take anything
[Guest]: Amit and I discuss on those margins, just even if we, we mentioned something, you know,
[Guest]: it's not our core competence. So my framework was the same framework I have used on every
[Guest]: single topic that you and I have discussed, simply because I have no other skill set other
[Guest]: than being an economist.
[Amit Varma]: And and that seems to me to be, you know, actually, a very important framework, because
[Amit Varma]: that is, you know, especially the part of the framework where you talk about understanding
[Amit Varma]: the political economy in India, which seems critical, because when we talk about India,
[Amit Varma]: in particular, you're going to a have a decision taken, which will have elements of both public
[Amit Varma]: policy and politics, where you will have people who have to make decisions and consider not
[Amit Varma]: just you know, the conflicting views of different experts from different sides, but also what
[Amit Varma]: is politically feasible, what they can get away with, at some points, you know, as in
[Amit Varma]: the case of extending the lockdown, there can be an element of covering your ass, and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth, we can discuss sort of the political considerations that go into
[Amit Varma]: that later. But, you know, you'd written an early column by early, I mean, it's recent,
[Amit Varma]: but it seems early on March 16, where in mint, where you recommended very strongly that India
[Amit Varma]: go for a lockdown. And I'll quote from that piece, you wrote, quote, according to World
[Amit Varma]: Bank data, 2017. India has eight doctors for every 10,000 Indians, compared to at least
[Amit Varma]: 41 doctors for 10,000 Italians. If India is three weeks behind Italy on the trend, and
[Amit Varma]: you meant the trend of the pandemic, if India is three weeks behind Italy on the trend,
[Amit Varma]: and if the country does not take drastic containment measures, given a weak healthcare setup, we
[Amit Varma]: will register much higher fatality rates, especially among the poor. So stop quote,
[Amit Varma]: and I of course, agree with you on this. And can you elaborate a little bit on why you
[Amit Varma]: were so you know, even long before Modi himself came to the conclusion you were recommending
[Amit Varma]: long before this column, in fact, that we have to do a lockdown? Why? So one of the
[Guest]: things that happens, I have the good fortune of working at the Mercatus Center, which thought
[Guest]: about COVID very deeply and carefully. You know, on a daily basis, I have the good fortune
[Guest]: of reading and thinking and talking through to with people like Tyler Cowen, and Alex
[Guest]: Dabrock, who write Marginal Revolution, they were way ahead of anyone else on the curve
[Guest]: of COVID because they saw what's happening in China. And that kind of got me started
[Guest]: because India has numbers which are very similar to China, right? So that's what really got
[Guest]: me started. So let me explain the the trade off and why I was so vehemently in favor of
[Guest]: a shutdown. When I saw what was happening in Italy, and about 1213 years ago, I have
[Guest]: the good fortune of living in Italy for a semester. So I reached out to my Italian friends,
[Guest]: I saw that almost every single one of them has lost someone in the family. The weekend,
[Guest]: you know, I think of 10th March, when I was working on this column, or I was thinking
[Guest]: about the column in Bergamo, the paper had 10 pages of obituaries. And that just kind
[Guest]: of shook me what was happening in Italy. So I started thinking through what would happen
[Guest]: if this happened in India, and I started looking at trends. Now, one thing where economists
[Guest]: are a little bit lucky is we really think about exponential functions well past ninth
[Guest]: or 10th standard, right? Most people in other jobs, they haven't looked at an exponential
[Guest]: function after, after their 10th standard board exams. And we are continuously looking
[Guest]: at growth rates, we're looking at compounding, we're looking at federal rates. So we are
[Guest]: in the habit of thinking about exponential rates and how compounding works, that if something
[Guest]: is doubling every seven days, you're not going to think of it as large numbers right now.
[Guest]: But five weeks from now, you're going to be in 10s of 1000s. Right? So what was happening
[Guest]: in Italy, when I started looking at the trend lines, India was just, you know, a few weeks
[Guest]: behind Italy. And when I saw what was happening in Italy, I was just shaken to the core. At
[Guest]: that time, Italy was also struggling with its hospital system. And I said, Okay, what
[Guest]: does the Indian healthcare system look like? I haven't lived in India for the last 12-13
[Guest]: years. So I don't know the changes. My experience from my childhood is that government hospitals
[Guest]: are extremely overcrowded. And all the private small dispensaries and clinics, some of them
[Guest]: serve the poor through charitable trusts, and you know, just people's goodwill. And
[Guest]: you know, the nonprofit sector, the really functional part of the Indian healthcare sector
[Guest]: is the private healthcare sector, which tends to be quite expensive. And I was like, let
[Guest]: me just get some numbers and start thinking about what this situation looks like. And
[Guest]: that is where my panic really began. And it became very clear to me where I am on the
[Guest]: trade off. So let me explain the trade off. During a pandemic, and of the kind, you know,
[Guest]: of the COVID kind, where it's highly infectious, and people can be asymptomatic, and they can
[Guest]: be carriers without knowing that they're carriers. Sometimes it takes 10 to 14 days for the symptoms
[Guest]: to manifest. So if they've attended an event, or they've shaken someone's hand, it's perfectly
[Guest]: possible that that person was not sick, and no precautions were required. But you realize
[Guest]: two weeks later that they were, in fact sick, or just hadn't, you know, developed the symptoms.
[Guest]: And you have been infected, and therefore you have interacted with 20 or 30 other people,
[Guest]: and you could have infected them. So, you know, COVID is a particular kind of virus,
[Guest]: which is a little bit hidden or unseen, as you would like to say. So the nature of this
[Guest]: virus means that it can spread quite quickly without people knowing. And that's exactly
[Guest]: what happened in other countries. Now, when something spreads very quickly, there is no
[Guest]: healthcare system in the world, no matter how developed a country, that provides one
[Guest]: hospital bed for every citizen. It doesn't exist. The reason it doesn't exist is it's
[Guest]: simply too costly. And in extremely rare circumstances, once in a century, once in a couple of centuries,
[Guest]: you hit a situation where everyone is sick at the same time, either because of a natural
[Guest]: disaster or war or pandemic. So for the rest of the time, it would be a huge opportunity
[Guest]: cost on the system to have one bed per individual. So no country, including the Scandinavian
[Guest]: countries or the United States, nobody has hit that measure. So every country estimates
[Guest]: some kind of healthcare capacity and says, this is how many hospital beds we have, this
[Guest]: is how many doctors we have, this is how many ventilators we have. In most developed countries,
[Guest]: this is a function of demand and supply. Demand and supply in these instances depends on how
[Guest]: rich the people in that particular country are, what kind of healthcare system they have,
[Guest]: do they have willingness to pay for it? If the demographics are tilted towards slightly
[Guest]: older people, then you tend to have more ventilators and intensive care units, which sort of support
[Guest]: the demand or the healthcare requirements of those people. So this varies across countries.
[Guest]: Now in India, we have realized now that our healthcare system is extremely weak. So we
[Guest]: have one of the fewest hospital beds amongst BRICS countries and most emerging economies.
[Guest]: You pointed out the figure on doctors, right? So India has only about 86 doctors per 100,000
[Guest]: people. The global average is 150 doctors per 100,000 people. South Africa has 91. Nigeria
[Guest]: is way worse than India. It has only 39 or 40 doctors per 100,000 people. So different
[Guest]: healthcare systems are in different points on capacity, right? Same thing with ventilators.
[Guest]: The United States has 172,000 ventilators and the ability to scale it up very quickly
[Guest]: because they specialize in building ventilators. India has only about 40 to 50,000 ventilators
[Guest]: and we import a lot of the ventilators and ventilator parts. So it's not easy for us
[Guest]: to scale that number quickly. So I started digging into all these different things and
[Guest]: looking at what can our healthcare capacity sustain? Because if everyone gets sick at
[Guest]: the same time, which is likely to happen, or a large population gets sick at the same
[Guest]: time through COVID, which is likely to happen, what will happen to our hospital system?
[Guest]: As I told you, what I found was extremely frightening. So we have very few hospital
[Guest]: beds, but even the hospital beds that we have, the big problem with it is that most of them
[Guest]: are taken, right? Our intensive care units are operating at almost 100% capacity at the
[Guest]: moment because intensive care units are extremely expensive and most of them are in the private
[Guest]: sector and no private hospital finds it in its interest to just have an empty bed in
[Guest]: intensive care. It's very, very costly, right? And there is fairly high demand. So we are
[Guest]: operating at very, very close to full capacity for intensive care units. We are operating,
[Guest]: when I called a few government hospitals and I asked them, what is their capacity right
[Guest]: now of available beds? They said, they're working at 120% capacity in government hospitals.
[Guest]: And I said, how is that possible? And they said, oh, we don't have beds. People bring
[Guest]: their own gaddahs and sleeping bags. They just come in for treatment. They sleep in
[Guest]: the corridor. AIMS in New Delhi is famous for having a whole number of cancer patients
[Guest]: who sleep under the flyover outside and just come in for treatment during the day. So this
[Guest]: is a system where the healthcare facility is operating at above 100% of the number of
[Guest]: beds they have because they need to treat a lot of people. They just don't have enough
[Guest]: beds, but they can't turn people away. So India's capacity was very low, which means
[Guest]: India desperately needs to flatten the curve. And what we mean by flattening the curve is
[Guest]: that we need to create a circumstance where everybody cannot get the infection at the
[Guest]: same time, right? So right now we don't have a vaccine for this. Different people have
[Guest]: started formulating a treatment protocol, but we don't have a vaccination. So in the
[Guest]: world without a vaccine, you need to close things down or social distance in a way that
[Guest]: a few people get sick at a time and we spread that out so that the hospital capacity is
[Guest]: not overwhelmed and doesn't collapse altogether. And this is not just true of India. It is
[Guest]: true of Italy. It is true of Spain. It is true of the United States. It's true of the
[Guest]: UK. So across the world, no matter how rich or poor you have, as I mentioned, there is
[Guest]: no healthcare system that has one bed and one doctor per citizen, which means we need
[Guest]: to find some way of flattening the curve. Now, here is the trade off, right? The better
[Guest]: your healthcare system or the greater the capacity of your healthcare system, the less
[Guest]: you need to flatten the curve, right? The more it can accommodate, such as Germany.
[Guest]: The worse your healthcare system, the poorer the capacity of the healthcare system, the
[Guest]: more you need to flatten the curve, which means you need to go towards more and more
[Guest]: severe or stringent lockdown measures. It just so happens that poorer countries have
[Guest]: worse healthcare systems, generally speaking, which means poorer countries, developing countries
[Guest]: will see the worst, most stringent lockdowns in this particular scenario. Otherwise they
[Guest]: will face huge outbreaks and local transmission and community transmission.
[Guest]: So India was very wise to recognize that our healthcare system is extremely weak and cannot
[Guest]: accommodate this. So we need the most stringent version of the lockdown, which is what I was
[Guest]: also advocating. Now, the trouble with that is poorer countries also cannot easily soften
[Guest]: or mitigate the problems that come with the lockdown. The lockdown means pretty much closing
[Guest]: down all economic activity. Economic activity is what keeps people's homes running, what
[Guest]: keeps the lights on, what puts food on the plate. And the poorer the country is, the
[Guest]: more stringent the lockdown measures, which means the more poor people suffer.
[Guest]: So the column that you read out on March 16th, all the stuff I had been tweeting just before
[Guest]: and after that, and also the columns and papers I have written successively after, in every
[Guest]: single one of them, I've categorically mentioned that the lockdown needs to be combined with
[Guest]: some kind of basic income or like direct cash transfer, right? Without that, the number
[Guest]: of poor people who will die in India of starvation is incredibly high. So we are in a very tough
[Guest]: situation right now. If we don't lock down, sorry, I just want to go back to one small
[Guest]: point you said, we'll get to this later in the episode, but I think it's pertinent to
[Guest]: mention it here. You said that a lot of poor people think that the lockdown is to keep
[Guest]: the rich people safe, right? The elites safe while they watch Netflix, the poor people
[Guest]: suffer. That was not the way I thought about it. The rich people, I'm afraid, will capture
[Guest]: all the private hospital capacity, which will respond very quickly to money flowing in.
[Guest]: So if there are lots of people who are demanding hospital beds, private hospitals will try
[Guest]: and quickly increase capacity to deal with the increased demand. Government hospitals
[Guest]: treat the poorest people and are doing it almost for free or very, very close to free.
[Guest]: These are the places which are already overcrowded. And according to me, the poor people are the
[Guest]: ones who would have been left without healthcare. So the lockdown, I believe, contrary to popular
[Guest]: opinion actually protects the poor from the worst circumstances. Second, the poor in India
[Guest]: have worse comorbidities because there is a greater amount of malnourishment. They have
[Guest]: lesser access to clean air and clean water than the elites. And these three things put
[Guest]: together place them at higher risk if they get infected by COVID. And that's another
[Guest]: reason why we really need to think about this for a majority of the country, which has not
[Guest]: got great resources or great healthcare. And they are the ones who will be protected by
[Guest]: a sensibly executed lockdown. Now, of course, we did not have a well-executed lockdown.
[Guest]: That's a whole different problem. But the original logic for me, sort of really putting
[Guest]: out a lot of statements in favour of shutting down the Mumbai locals or in favour of shutting
[Guest]: down a lot of economic activity and trying to flatten the curve was because I saw the
[Guest]: other half of the equation, which is our healthcare capacity. And it is abysmal to non-existent,
[Guest]: especially in the government sector.
[Amit Varma]: Right. So, you know, before I get to my next question, a couple of related thoughts. One,
[Amit Varma]: I want to underline for my listeners how extraordinary this virus is, the specific coronavirus is,
[Amit Varma]: SARS-CoV-2, which is in the sense, it's practically the optimal virus if you want to cause damage.
[Amit Varma]: If you look at viruses of the past, like Ebola, for example, Ebola had a far higher mortality
[Amit Varma]: rate, I think almost half the people who got it died. But the point is that you immediately
[Amit Varma]: became symptomatic, that is, you developed symptoms immediately, which immobilized you,
[Amit Varma]: and you weren't able to travel around much to pass the virus on, and people would know
[Amit Varma]: to avoid you because the symptoms would be so obvious. What is remarkable about this
[Amit Varma]: specific coronavirus is that one, it takes a long time before carriers show symptoms
[Amit Varma]: and sometimes they do not show symptoms at all. So they feel they are perfectly normal,
[Amit Varma]: they're going around interacting with people, and they are passing the virus on. And at
[Amit Varma]: the same time, while we don't know the specific mortality rate yet, that's something we'll
[Amit Varma]: know only over a much longer period of time. The fact is that it is still high enough to
[Amit Varma]: cause a huge amount of damage. So you have a very high chance of infectiousness of this
[Amit Varma]: being passed around, combined with a mortality that is high enough to paralyze healthcare
[Amit Varma]: systems once things get out of hand. So it is practically the optimal virus. And here
[Amit Varma]: in India, we actually had a chance to see this play out first in China, and then in
[Amit Varma]: Italy, which is a first world country with, you know, developed healthcare systems. And
[Amit Varma]: we saw how things batter. My second observation would be that as far as affecting the poor
[Amit Varma]: is concerned, I agree with that. And I think both of us would agree that I mean, my guiding
[Amit Varma]: principle when I think of public policy is Mahatma Gandhi's guiding principle, which
[Amit Varma]: is a question he always asked himself is how will this affect the poor? That's what I care
[Amit Varma]: about. If the answer to that is negative, I don't care what else the policy does. In
[Amit Varma]: India, our imperative is to remove poverty, which you know, we have, there's been a failure
[Amit Varma]: over decades. And there's also been some limited success since liberalization. But by and large,
[Amit Varma]: that's still a moral imperative. We haven't paid enough enough attention to so I agree
[Amit Varma]: with that. Now, now the dilemma here is that, look, when we think about a policy, we don't,
[Amit Varma]: we can't only think of how the policy would work in theory, we have to think about how
[Amit Varma]: it would work in practice. So the paradox here is that on the one hand, you know, people
[Amit Varma]: like you and me are proposing a lockdown because state capacity in India has failed to the
[Amit Varma]: extent that our healthcare systems are so poor. And we know that there will be carnage,
[Amit Varma]: especially among the poor people of India, if the pandemic really takes off here. So
[Amit Varma]: there appears to be no option but a lockdown. That's the theory of it. Now the practice
[Amit Varma]: of it, which also you've recognized, and you've commented on that right from the start, but
[Amit Varma]: it's part of the paradox. The practice is that because of that state capacity, it is
[Amit Varma]: also going to have enormous costs upon the poor. And by that, I don't just mean state
[Amit Varma]: capacity in terms of the manpower of the state or what the state can do, and so on. But also
[Amit Varma]: in terms of the approach and expertise, for example, your first piece asking for a lockdown
[Amit Varma]: on March 16, you know, illustrated exponential growth with a chessboard where you place a
[Amit Varma]: grain of rice on the first square and two on the second and you keep doubling and so
[Amit Varma]: on. And then on March 30, you wrote another piece that I'm going to quote from which also
[Amit Varma]: circles back to a chessboard. And in this you wrote, quote, in an earlier column, I
[Amit Varma]: had compared various attempts at social and economic engineering with the exertions of
[Amit Varma]: Adam Smith's man of system, who, quote, seems to imagine that he can arrange the different
[Amit Varma]: members of a great society with as much ease as a hand arranges the different pieces upon
[Amit Varma]: a chessboard. Stop quote twice. And, you know, and this sort of engineering mindset of designing
[Amit Varma]: society is, you know, something that is endemic in India that has caused much distress in
[Amit Varma]: say, earlier cases like demonetization, to just take a recent example. And so how do
[Amit Varma]: you account for that, where it seems evident to you that only social distancing can save
[Amit Varma]: us, we have to have a lockdown. But at the same time, you just know that the cost will
[Amit Varma]: be so incredibly high. And if you are to attempt, say, a sort of a utilitarian kind of calculation
[Amit Varma]: here, you can only attempt utilitarian calculations where you have enough knowledge and here everything
[Amit Varma]: is in this fog where the cost can be absolutely humongous. Did any of it take you by surprise
[Amit Varma]: what happened all the things that went wrong after a lockdown? And how does one think of
[Guest]: this?
[Guest]: Okay, so I'm going to answer you, you've, you've posed like a really big problem. So
[Guest]: I'm going to take a stab at it in two, three different parts. So the big conundrum we have
[Guest]: right now is, as you know, I'm a public choice trained economist. And one of the key learnings
[Guest]: of public choice is we don't just think of market failure, we also think of government
[Guest]: failure, right? And this COVID-19 pandemic has brought us to our knees on both market
[Guest]: failure and government failure, right? There is no question there's a market failure problem
[Guest]: in the sense that there is a huge externality that private individuals can pose on other
[Guest]: private individuals deliberately or inadvertently because of the characteristics of the virus,
[Guest]: as you mentioned. And there is no easy market-based decentralized solution to the problem, right?
[Guest]: It's in everyone's interest to be out and about, especially if they're asymptomatic.
[Guest]: But that also means that they can spread the virus much more quickly and affect the people
[Guest]: who are in high risk groups, who are really going to lose their lives because of it. So
[Guest]: we need some kind of government intervention to, you know, regulate or impose social distancing,
[Guest]: the most stringent version of it being a lockdown. But the flip side to that is while there is
[Guest]: market failure, there is also government failure, right? And weaker states, developing countries,
[Guest]: poorer states tend to be rife with government failure problems. America has had such a high
[Guest]: degree of government failure while dealing with this pandemic. And everyone has been
[Guest]: talking about Trump's response and how, you know, the administration was asleep at the
[Guest]: wheel and they delayed any kind of, you know, putting in place any machinery for social
[Guest]: distancing as well as treatment, as well as economic stimulus and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So in that sense, it doesn't surprise me that different governments across the world are
[Guest]: struggling with the appropriate response, right? What did surprise me about the Indian
[Guest]: government's response is that it was so blind and deaf to the poor. That genuinely shocked
[Guest]: me, because normally the way I think about this is politicians are self-interested and
[Guest]: they think of their core, you know, sort of voting constituency. India is a poor country.
[Guest]: A lot of the people were talking about the median voter is also typically below the,
[Guest]: you know, not, they don't make elite salaries. They don't live elite lifestyles. And I thought
[Guest]: that all policies, when it came to the lockdown, out of sheer self-interest would be made keeping
[Guest]: that person in mind, you know, your core constituency of voters. The way those people were just
[Guest]: rendered invisible in our system, that truly took me by surprise. And I realized when I
[Guest]: wrote the Man of System column in regard to Modi's lockdown, it was very specifically
[Guest]: talking about the lockdown announcement. If we go back to that announcement, which was,
[Guest]: you know, end of March, he does not mention what is an essential service, right? There
[Guest]: is no clarity on what will be open and what is to remain closed. There is no clarity or
[Guest]: direction given to the police on how they are to enforce the lockdown. The moment he
[Guest]: finished his announcement at about 8.30 PM, there was a run on all the stores and pharmacies
[Guest]: because people wanted to stock up because they didn't know if they can get milk tomorrow.
[Guest]: And the reason they didn't know if they can get milk tomorrow is because there was no
[Guest]: direction on a 40 minute, you know, prime ministerial broadcast on whether he thought
[Guest]: essential services would stay open and how he was planning to deal with it. Now, my understanding
[Guest]: of why that announcement was made in a particular way was he thought people will just trust
[Guest]: him. So if he says, we will keep essential services open, people just trust him, you
[Guest]: know, like nice pieces on the chessboard, they stay put. And they say, I think that's
[Guest]: what happened. I'm not sure. It's far worse with migrants, right? Economic migrants, especially
[Guest]: in the informal sector, almost all are in the informal sector. They've been rendered
[Guest]: utterly invisible in our current political economy. And this is not a COVID problem.
[Guest]: This is a larger political economy problem in India. 92% of the Indian labor force works
[Guest]: in the informal sector. 60 to 70% are daily wage laborers in that particular system. Only
[Guest]: 8% of India's labor force is formal, you know, all above board with formal contracts. In
[Guest]: these circumstances, when like we're talking not about a few thousand people or a hundred
[Guest]: thousand people, we're talking about 400, 500 million people in the country at a particular
[Guest]: point in time, just to not think of them or not to think about how they're going to survive
[Guest]: the next three weeks when they don't have a daily wage coming in. He did not make an
[Guest]: announcement to give them any income support. There was no announcement made for in-kind
[Guest]: transfer in that particular, you know, press announcement. There was literally nothing
[Guest]: for them. So are we really surprised that they wanted to go home? Right? If there's
[Guest]: any kind of economic uncertainty, the first thing I would want to do is go to a safe place
[Guest]: where I will be looked after as opposed to being a strange city where I'm staying in
[Guest]: a slum, where I don't know if I'll have a job tomorrow, where I don't know if I can
[Guest]: get out of the home tomorrow and I can even buy bread or biscuits to eat. So we saw this
[Guest]: huge exodus of migrant labor trying to go back home to places where they have a safety
[Guest]: net. And then we saw the state just come down on them with the full brute force, literally
[Guest]: beating people up. You know, who was standing at bus stops. What happened in Anand Vihar
[Guest]: in Delhi is just an embarrassment. So it's a combination of a complete failure to understand
[Guest]: how a normal, rational person would think in these circumstances and a particular sort
[Guest]: of blindness to who are the people in need in India? Who are the people who are vulnerable
[Guest]: to economic stress, who are vulnerable to health stress or vulnerable to social stress?
[Guest]: And how do we keep that person in mind, like the Gandhi talisman that you spoke about and
[Guest]: figure out policies around it? His press announcement just completely sort of, it was a failure
[Guest]: on all of those counts. There was some relief package which was announced 48 hours later.
[Guest]: It was too little, too late. By then the economic stress and the panic related economic stress
[Guest]: and uncertainty had already spread, right? In every single one of my recommendations
[Guest]: to have a lockdown, at each point I've said, we need to give direct cash transfer, maybe
[Guest]: some food subsidies for three to four months. Because let's say the lockdown lifts in five
[Guest]: weeks, doesn't mean all industries are going to function, right? Are we going to allow
[Guest]: construction? Is that essential? If you don't allow construction, then all the people who
[Guest]: work on daily labor as daily labor and construction sites are no longer going to have a job. So
[Guest]: we need to really carefully think about what does the Indian political economy look like?
[Guest]: Who are the people working in it? There's only seven to 8% elites who have formal contracts,
[Guest]: internet, who can stay at home and think about, you know, I'm getting bored watching Netflix
[Guest]: kind of problem. Everyone else is going to think about livelihood. They're going to think
[Guest]: about their children. They're going to think about the ability to feed themselves and literally
[Guest]: no sort of, you know, policy or emergency relief was created for them. Now things have
[Guest]: started coming in. The government has started thinking more keenly about emergency relief.
[Guest]: You know, they're thinking of opening up food go downs, you know, giving away in-kind transfers
[Guest]: in terms of food grain, things like that, LPG gas. So the government has now started
[Guest]: thinking about it, but the initial wave of panic could have just been stopped if the
[Guest]: Modi administration had thought about the citizens as individual people who react to
[Guest]: circumstances as opposed to pieces on a chess board, which can simply be pushed around.
[Amit Varma]: So I have like three observations to make here. The third one in part a disagreement,
[Amit Varma]: which leads to a further question. But the first two observations are that number one,
[Amit Varma]: when we speak of state capacity, I'd also like to speak of within that subset, which
[Amit Varma]: is intellectual capacity in the sense that one thing I think that does not exist in the
[Amit Varma]: state is the capacity to appreciate the complexities of the economy, which run through spontaneous
[Amit Varma]: disorder. For example, nobody within the state seemed to figure out that, you know, that
[Amit Varma]: almost every service in a sense was an essential service because they were all interconnected.
[Amit Varma]: It was one thing to say that, okay, a grocery store is an essential service and it will
[Amit Varma]: remain open, but there is an entire supply chain of, for example, truckers are bringing
[Amit Varma]: maida to the grocery store and those truckers have to eat somewhere. And if the dhabas are
[Amit Varma]: closed on the highway, they cannot drive the truck. And there are all kinds of ancillaries
[Amit Varma]: up and down the chain, which involves practically the whole economy. And honestly, those are
[Amit Varma]: all too complex for a central planner or a group of babus or an expert committee sitting
[Amit Varma]: down somewhere to basically figure out that these are all the things that will happen.
[Amit Varma]: This is not meant in any way as a criticism of the lockdown or to say that the lockdown
[Amit Varma]: should not have happened. You know, like you, I recommended from the start, we should have
[Amit Varma]: a lockdown and I stand by that. But these are some of the things which you couldn't
[Amit Varma]: have looked at. Secondly, one of the things which came, I won't say it appalled me because
[Amit Varma]: it was not new to me. One of the things that came into stark relief during this entire
[Amit Varma]: period is you use the term citizens earlier. I object to that because constantly the political
[Amit Varma]: dispensation has treated us not as citizens, but as subjects. You know, even in the Prime
[Amit Varma]: Minister's last address, which he made where he's saying that keep a distance and we must
[Amit Varma]: make sure it doesn't spread and blah, blah, blah. It was all about this is what you must
[Amit Varma]: do. It's not about here is what I am doing for you. I am the Pradhan Sevak. These are
[Amit Varma]: the incentives I've put in place to get more mass manufactured. These are, you know, how
[Amit Varma]: we are going to get more ventilators down and all of that. Nothing about what he was
[Amit Varma]: doing for us, but more about here is what you subjects must do. And you know, that sort
[Amit Varma]: of approach is a little appalling. The third area where I want to sort of cast a sceptical
[Amit Varma]: eye on what you said about cash transfers and food subsidies and all that. Forget the
[Amit Varma]: theory of that. I'm not going to argue now about whether those are desirable or not.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm just going to say that listen, the state could not have implemented them. So
[Amit Varma]: even if they were to see that there'll be a huge problem with migrant labor, and we
[Amit Varma]: need to feed everyone, the state did not have the capacity and does not have the capacity
[Amit Varma]: as of now to implement it. In fact, you know what you see in the big cities where I'm familiar
[Amit Varma]: with relief efforts such as Mumbai and Delhi, 90% if not more of the relief efforts at feeding
[Amit Varma]: these migrants or sheltering these migrants are coming from civil society. And because
[Amit Varma]: I define markets as basically all voluntary exchanges, it is actually markets which are
[Amit Varma]: coming into play. So you know, society helping itself and the state remaining a sort of a
[Amit Varma]: failed state. And this actually sheds light. And of course, you know, COVID-19 sheds light
[Amit Varma]: on many things. And we'll speak about that as this episode goes on. But one of the things
[Amit Varma]: that it shed lights on is why government needs to be as local as possible. Because the more
[Amit Varma]: local government is, the more problems like this are solvable. You know, for example,
[Amit Varma]: you see the response in Kerala where you really see the benefits of local government and local
[Amit Varma]: knowledge coming into play. Even in Maharashtra sitting in Mumbai, I'm pleasantly surprised
[Amit Varma]: at the leadership and communication of someone like Uddhav Thackeray. I mean, I've opposed
[Amit Varma]: the Shiv Sena all my life, but he's been coming on TV every evening or giving these broadcasts
[Amit Varma]: every evening in Marathi, where he's just talking in this conversational way about the
[Amit Varma]: nuts and bolts of what is happening and what he's doing. And my sense is that the more
[Amit Varma]: local you make governance, the better the governance will be, which is a larger point
[Amit Varma]: to people like you and I have made forever, but has come into sharp focus because of this
[Guest]: crisis. Yeah, so I'll tell you where I mean, I completely agree with you, even your disagreement
[Guest]: with me. My point was not that the state can actually execute a direct cash transfer perfectly.
[Guest]: My point was more that they didn't even think about it, right? Just the complete like blindness
[Guest]: to who are the people in this country and what will be the immediate, you know, cause
[Guest]: for panic or what are the immediate circumstances? Now, if they had announced something like
[Guest]: that, it might have sort of not caused the large scale exodus. Now, I completely agree
[Guest]: with you that India doesn't have the state capacity to execute these things perfectly,
[Guest]: but it would have at least prevented the original chaos that started, which potentially could
[Guest]: have spread the virus, which was already in big cities to now, you know, districts in
[Guest]: Western Bihar and UP. So that could have been prevented, but it wasn't prevented because
[Guest]: they just weren't thinking about people, as you said, like citizens, they were thinking
[Guest]: about them like subjects or just someone to be directed. Now, coming to the state capacity
[Guest]: issue, this is the great conundrum of this COVID crisis. Now, we need the lockdown because
[Guest]: we have poor healthcare capacity. We have poor healthcare capacity because we have overall
[Guest]: weak state capacity, but overall weak state capacity also means two more things. One,
[Guest]: we cannot enforce social distancing very well, right? And this is on two margins. One is
[Guest]: we just don't have the manpower and personnel to actually make sure that everyone is sheltered
[Guest]: in place. Everyone has essentials, everyone has food, and, you know, people who need help
[Guest]: or medical assistance have it so that they can shelter in place properly. We don't have
[Guest]: that manpower at the state level, which means a lot of the, you know, gaps are picked up
[Guest]: by civil society. The second part is weak state capacity also means that we don't have,
[Guest]: not everyone in India has clean water or access to clean water, which means this whole, please
[Guest]: keep washing your hands. I mean, it's laughable. 10% of India has absolutely no access to clean
[Guest]: piped water, right? In the other 90%, we have pretty good data on who has piped water to
[Guest]: their dwelling, but most people have extreme water shortages. Close to 60% of Indians who
[Guest]: do get piped water have extreme water shortages, especially in the summer months, right? For
[Guest]: anything except drinking water. Most of rural India, you know, 50%, 60% of rural India relies
[Guest]: on community hand pumps to get most of its water. So in these circumstances, even the
[Guest]: simplest solution, which is keep washing your hands, it is a huge protection against the
[Guest]: spread of the virus, is not easily implementable in India. Now you live in Mumbai, one of the
[Guest]: ticking time bombs in Mumbai, which literally keeps me up at night is Dharavi. Dharavi,
[Guest]: in the slum part of Dharavi, they don't have access to clean water. Four to 500 people
[Guest]: on average use a single bathroom facility, right? And all this is a function of weak
[Guest]: state capacity to begin with. The inability to make sure that we have access to clean
[Guest]: water, that we have access to clean sanitation facilities, that people are not washing their
[Guest]: hands right next to where people are openly defecating or urinating. We have not solved
[Guest]: that problem in 70 years. So now suddenly putting on a mask on TV and saying, please
[Guest]: keep washing your hands, it doesn't get you very far because the state capacity has not
[Guest]: made that solution possible. So we have a problem in both facilitating shelter in place
[Guest]: and social distancing, and also in the most basic forms, which is, you know, can people
[Guest]: wash their hands? Can people keep themselves clean? So this is just the kind of, or sort
[Guest]: of the depth of the problem we have with COVID. Now, these problems make the lockdown even
[Guest]: more essential, right? Because if people can't shelter in place appropriately and they can't
[Guest]: wash their hands and they could possibly become vectors or worse still asymptomatic vectors
[Guest]: spreading the virus, then even more reason we need a more stringent version of the lockdown.
[Guest]: So then the police and the danda comes down even more harshly. So the whole problem as
[Guest]: you rightly identified is one of very weak state capacity, both intellectual, also in
[Guest]: terms of manpower, and also in terms of just the way we think about these problems at the
[Guest]: union, state and local government level. Now coming to the local government issue, a lot
[Guest]: of these problems of, you know, clean water, public sanitation, the ability to have access
[Guest]: to facilities, right? Just can I go to a food shelter? Can I get access to water easily?
[Guest]: Can I get access to medical supplies easily? These things are best done at the municipal
[Guest]: level and over 70 years, we never built up any kind of local government and we didn't
[Guest]: empower it. You and I have talked about this in at least two of your previous episodes,
[Guest]: one which was on urban local government and the other one which was on a cast and open
[Guest]: defecation. In both cases, we discussed in detail how the 73rd and the 74th amendment
[Guest]: of the constitution created an entire layer of government. They empowered it to be democratically
[Guest]: elected, but they never devolved funds to that layer of government. So, you know, we
[Guest]: have no fiscal federalism in India. Municipalities today, if the union government writes a check
[Guest]: and just sends it to municipal governments, they don't have the capacity to even spend
[Guest]: it because they have not developed capacity over the years, hired enough manpower, actually
[Guest]: spent these resources. Kerala and Tamil Nadu are two states which historically devolved
[Guest]: much more of the governance to the local level from the state government and that's why they
[Guest]: have been so good at combating this current problem, right, of COVID-19. Kerala has been
[Guest]: particularly good for other reasons too, which we can get into if you want, but the element
[Guest]: of how strong is your local governance is incredibly important. Now, in the absence
[Guest]: of union government being able to do anything, state government not being able to reach the
[Guest]: last mile, our fail-safe in India is civil society and it has always been civil society.
[Guest]: It was the case during demonetization, it was really civil society which came to the
[Guest]: rescue. You know, people started using each other, family networks, giving each other
[Guest]: IOUs to actually get through life and even then we had an inordinate human cost, a lot
[Guest]: of deaths, a lot of deprivation, a lot of loss of livelihood, but people got through
[Guest]: because of civil society and COVID-19 is no different. They will, whatever we manage to
[Amit Varma]: get through will be because of civil society. On that hopeful note, let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break. See you after a minute. If you're listening to The Scene and The Unseen, it means you
[Amit Varma]: like listening to audio and you're thirsty for knowledge. That being the case, I'd urge
[Amit Varma]: you to check out Storytel, the sponsors of this episode. Storytel is an audiobook platform
[Amit Varma]: that has a massive range of audiobooks from around the world. Their international collection
[Amit Varma]: is stellar, but so is a local collection. They have a fantastic range of Marathi and
[Amit Varma]: Hindi audiobooks. What's more, I do a weekly podcast there called The Book Club with Amit
[Amit Varma]: Verma, in which I talk about one book every week, giving context, giving you a taste of
[Amit Varma]: it and so on. Download that app and listen to my show. And as long as Storytel sponsors
[Amit Varma]: this show within this commercial itself, I will recommend an audiobook that I liked on
[Amit Varma]: that platform every week. My recommendation for this week is Lihaaf by Ismat Chugtai.
[Amit Varma]: This is a classic Urdu short story written in 1942 that takes an acute view of desire,
[Amit Varma]: sexuality, and society, and it's way ahead of its times. Chugtai was prosecuted for obscenity
[Amit Varma]: but acquitted by the courts because her story is so subtle that there is no overt sexuality
[Amit Varma]: in her story. Everything is powerfully suggested and unseen, as it were. Do check it out on
[Amit Varma]: Storytel. Lihaaf by Ismat Chugtai. Download the Storytel app or visit Storytel.com. Remember
[Amit Varma]: that Storytel with a single L. Storytel.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen. I'm chatting with Shruti Rajgopalan about
[Amit Varma]: COVID-19, a subject she spent a lot of time thinking and writing about. And one of the
[Amit Varma]: places where her writing has appeared on this is on the great blog Marginal Revolution,
[Amit Varma]: which is even though the age of blogs is dead, that is a one blog I still go to almost every
[Amit Varma]: day to remarkable thinkers who run it, Tyler Cowen and Alex Tabarrok, both of whom have
[Amit Varma]: been on The Scene and The Unseen. In fact, I have one episode I recorded with Shruti
[Amit Varma]: and Alex when I met them in Delhi at the start of Feb, which will now be released in June.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, it has nothing to do with COVID, obviously, because it was the start of Feb.
[Amit Varma]: You'll have to wait for that. But I have rambled again. The reason I brought up Marginal Revolution
[Amit Varma]: was that Shruti wrote a piece on Marginal Revolution and all her stuff will be linked
[Amit Varma]: from the show notes, where Shruti, you spoke about the few things that the government needs
[Amit Varma]: to do to make the lockdown a success. Like this piece was written right after the lockdown
[Amit Varma]: was announced. And you said, okay, it's not enough to announce it. You need to make sure
[Amit Varma]: that we use this opportunity. Here are the things we need to do. So can you recapitulate
[Guest]: some of that for me? Yeah, so the way this came about is I work
[Guest]: at George Mason University. So you know, the Marginal Revolution appearance should be considered
[Guest]: in that context. Tyler Cowen runs is also the academic director of the Mercator Center,
[Guest]: which is where I work. Alex Tabarrok and Tyler were both my teachers when I did my PhD. Alex
[Guest]: is also a co-author. And we've appeared on your podcast and done a few things together.
[Guest]: So when the lockdown happened in India, as soon as Prime Minister Modi announced the
[Guest]: lockdown, I started thinking through, you know, the kinds of things that are important.
[Guest]: And my way, just like you, of thinking through a lot of these ideas is just to write and
[Guest]: I'd written an email to Tyler Cowen. And that, you know, a version of that email is what
[Guest]: appeared on the blog. So that's what you see. Now, when the lockdown was going on, I was
[Guest]: working on another paper with my co-author, Abhishek Chautagunta. He is a doctoral student
[Guest]: at the University of Hamburg, really smart, young economist. And we were working on assessing
[Guest]: India's healthcare capacity. So this is the first paper, which we've alluded to a few
[Guest]: times where we were looking at how many hospital beds does India have? How many doctors does
[Guest]: it have? And so on. This is now a Mercatus working paper and it's available publicly.
[Guest]: So while writing this paper, a few things became very clear. One, as I said, overall,
[Guest]: India's healthcare capacity is extremely weak, right? Another thing that became very clear,
[Guest]: and I wasn't aware of this because I've not worked on the health sector before the COVID
[Guest]: crisis, is that India's private sector for healthcare is about three to four times larger
[Guest]: in terms of overall healthcare capacity than the government healthcare system, right? And
[Guest]: that has been consequence of a lot of historical policies and the focus of the government.
[Guest]: But consequently, about 55 to 60% of the hospital bed capacity is in the private sector in India.
[Guest]: 90% of the doctors work in the private or charitable sector in India, right? 80% of
[Guest]: the ventilators are in the private sector because close to 80% or more of the intensive
[Guest]: care beds are in the private sector. So it became very clear to me that during the lockdown,
[Guest]: the whole point of the lockdown, as we mentioned at the head of the podcast, is that there's
[Guest]: this trade-off, right? We need to flatten the curve. So a lockdown is only helpful if
[Guest]: you build up healthcare capacity during the lockdown so that when things start slowly
[Guest]: opening up, you have more healthcare capacity to deal with the transmission of the virus.
[Guest]: Now, if you don't do that, no matter when you lift the lockdown, there is going to be
[Guest]: a spread of infection and we can't have an endless lockdown. So this was from that point
[Guest]: of view. Now, if the Indian healthcare system was entirely run by the government as it is
[Guest]: in many other countries, I would have had a different recommendation. But most of India's
[Guest]: healthcare resources, especially at the top end for critical care, ventilators, pharmaceuticals,
[Guest]: all of this is in the private sector, which means that to battle the COVID crisis, we
[Guest]: need to really rely on the private sector response. And as you and I have talked about
[Guest]: many, many times before, we need to sort of initiate and stimulate private response by
[Guest]: incentivizing them. And the best way to incentivize them is to pump in a lot of funds into the
[Guest]: private sector and not take it over. So as you know, in India, we have a huge tendency
[Guest]: to nationalize things. It seems that hasn't happened in a while, since Indira Gandhi,
[Guest]: what we nationalized and demonetized our currency. So the tendency to sort of appropriate private
[Guest]: property and nationalize is been there in every single government in India, not just
[Guest]: the Modi government. So my first recommendation was that we need to resist that temptation
[Guest]: because the moment you nationalize private healthcare capacity, it cannot grow. So if
[Guest]: today we have 131 beds per 100,000 by including public and private capacity, tomorrow, if
[Guest]: you nationalize it, that's where it ends. On the other hand, if you say that we're going
[Guest]: to pay for all tests and the treatment, even of the poorest people, please keep your doors
[Guest]: open to them. The government will reimburse or subsidize. Then private sector has a huge
[Guest]: incentive to respond and increase capacity. So this has been said many, many times over.
[Guest]: You mentioned marginal revolution, the book that is written by Tyler Cowen and Alex Tabarrok
[Guest]: on principles of microeconomics has this lovely sentence on the price system. It says the
[Guest]: price is a signal wrapped in an incentive. So it both signals whether there is a shortage
[Guest]: or whether there is a surplus because the price will adjust, but it is also an incentive.
[Guest]: When prices are high, suppliers have an incentive to increase supply. So that was the thought
[Guest]: process behind it. It's really econ 101. We're in an emergency. When you take stock, most
[Guest]: of the resources are in the private sector. So let's respond with that. Aside from most
[Guest]: of our resources being in the private sector, the other thing I realized, and this will
[Guest]: be of no surprise to you because we've talked about this for education. It's no different
[Guest]: in healthcare. Even the poorest Indians prefer going to a private healthcare facility and
[Guest]: paying a lot of money for it rather than going to the free or highly subsidized government
[Guest]: facility. And you can imagine why government hospitals are not that great. They are extremely
[Guest]: overcrowded. They have very few doctor to patient ratio. They don't have the most advanced
[Guest]: equipment and especially at the smaller primary healthcare centers, depending on which state
[Guest]: you're in, things tend to be falling apart, right? So if you look at the national sample
[Guest]: survey data across every expenditure quintile, that is from the lowest household expenditure
[Guest]: group, the lowest fifth to the highest, every single quintile, people prefer going to private
[Guest]: hospitals and they spend an enormous amount of money in private hospitals. And the way
[Guest]: they fund that is borrowing from family, selling jewelry, selling land and things like that.
[Guest]: So there is a huge demand even amongst the poorest citizens to go to private facilities
[Guest]: so we can just leverage that if the state said we will subsidize it, right? And this
[Guest]: is the time for the state to intervene and really look after people. I would have said
[Guest]: that the same is true for testing. And as you know, the Supreme Court has displayed
[Guest]: and continue to display its complete economic illiteracy and lack of common sense time and
[Guest]: time again. They said that all private labs need to conduct tests for free, right? Now
[Guest]: the problem with this is private labs can't just work on science and good intentions.
[Guest]: They need to cover their costs. And if you tell someone that they can't make money even
[Guest]: to pay their employees and keep the lights on, then they will just shut shop, which means
[Guest]: we already have too few labs in India. We're going to have even fewer because of this awful
[Guest]: policy. What they should have said instead, I mean, first they shouldn't have said anything
[Guest]: at all on this matter because they're really giving executive orders from the bench. This
[Guest]: is not a judicial issue, right? So they should have stayed away from it. What the executive
[Guest]: state government and union government should have said instead was we will reimburse private
[Guest]: labs for tests where people cannot pay for tests, right? And usually in these circumstances,
[Guest]: it's not like there's going to be a huge moral hazard problem. Rich people can easily pay
[Guest]: 4,000 rupees or whatever the cost of a private test is, whereas poor people can't. And that
[Guest]: difference is quite clear. And I think we can trust hospitals to know who can pay and
[Guest]: who cannot pay depending on the circumstances and the government should have just reimbursed.
[Guest]: So there will be much more large scale, wide scale testing, right? The poorest people will
[Guest]: not be denied tests, but at the same time, we don't compromise testing capacity because
[Guest]: private labs need to provide a bulk of testing capacity. The other reason we want a lot of
[Guest]: new private labs to come up is we don't want everyone to go to one place for a test in
[Guest]: a pandemic. We want people to go to a lot of different private labs. In fact, what we
[Guest]: want is mobile labs that go to people. So these are the sorts of things that the government
[Guest]: should have thought about that I hinted in that marginal revolution blog post. And this
[Guest]: really had to do with me evaluating along with Abhishek Chattergunta, the kind of healthcare
[Guest]: capacity we have. And we found that, you know, a bulk of it is in the private sector and
[Guest]: two other findings from that paper were that there is huge variation in capacity across
[Guest]: different states. Healthcare is a state level subject in India. And the difference between
[Guest]: Andhra Pradesh and Bihar is just staggering, right? So there are even within India, as
[Guest]: you know, Kerala has dealt with the problem particularly well. But Andhra Pradesh has
[Guest]: very high ratio of doctors per capita or hospital beds per capita. Bihar, UP, Chhattisgarh,
[Guest]: Jharkhand, traditionally extremely low. And you can imagine this, right? Poorer states
[Guest]: also have, you know, lower GDP per capita, which means lower demand for private healthcare
[Guest]: facilities, which means fewer clusters of healthcare in urban and peri-urban areas.
[Guest]: So they just stuck with whatever the government healthcare system is. So that is kind of,
[Guest]: you know, the situation there. The third, and this is extremely related to COVID, is
[Guest]: most of the government efforts in healthcare facilities are in rural areas. And this is
[Guest]: historically because, you know, rural health has been a huge problem. Infant mortality
[Guest]: rates in rural areas has been very high historically. So over the last 30 years, successive governments
[Guest]: have made a huge push to improve rural healthcare. In the process, most of the government facilities
[Guest]: are in rural areas and fewer in urban areas. And most of the urban healthcare is handled
[Guest]: by the private sector. But this also means that the urban poor are at risk, if you're
[Guest]: not willing to subsidize the private sector, because they will overcrowd existing government
[Guest]: hospitals and that number is extremely low in urban areas. And urban areas are at a high
[Guest]: risk of the pandemic. So these were some of the trends that we found, which I tried to
[Guest]: highlight. And because of this understanding of the difference between the healthcare capacity
[Guest]: of the private sector and government sector, I made certain recommendations, which is,
[Guest]: you know, we need to incentivize the private sector, and we need to think about how we
[Guest]: spread the problem across the country. And some of it is to, you know, make sure we don't
[Guest]: have price and quantity controls. We don't have import tariffs right now when we desperately
[Guest]: need to import testing kits. We try and have some kind of bilateral negotiations with various
[Guest]: countries. As you know, we are a huge producer of generic pharmaceuticals, and the whole
[Guest]: world is relying on us to supply some of this, including the anti-malarial, which, you know,
[Guest]: some people have found may or may not help treat COVID. But we should also think about
[Guest]: things that India doesn't have, such as ventilators, right? India is extremely short of ventilators.
[Guest]: We have only about 48,000 ventilators across the country. And most of them, as I mentioned
[Guest]: before, are already taken. So we need to think about importing ventilators from other countries,
[Guest]: right? So we need to keep the market system open and functioning, even though the tendency
[Guest]: during the pandemic is let's suppress the market system.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I want to elaborate a little bit on that. But first, I want to express my outrage,
[Amit Varma]: which all my listeners will share, that one of my guests before I could said the word
[Amit Varma]: incentive, there is this common trope on Twitter that Amit can't go five minutes without talking
[Amit Varma]: about incentives on his show. And I did not do it through the entire first half. But now
[Amit Varma]: that you've brought it up, I'm an economist, so kill me. Yeah. So now that you have brought
[Amit Varma]: it up, I will have to sort of elaborate on an aspect of what you mentioned, which is
[Amit Varma]: a beautiful phrase of prices being signals wrapped up in incentives. An illustration
[Amit Varma]: of that, for example, is a price control that was initiated a few days ago on hand sanitizers.
[Amit Varma]: And the result of that is that you don't have hand sanitizers in the market right now, at
[Amit Varma]: least last I checked. And look, here's how it works. What happens is, let's say there's
[Amit Varma]: a hand sanitizer, which is going for 50 rupees, a bottle of hand sanitizer for 50 rupees,
[Amit Varma]: suddenly it becomes 200 rupees. And the state steps in and says, Oh, you know, hand sanitizer
[Amit Varma]: seller, you are profiteering. This is bad. What will the poor do? No, the price must
[Amit Varma]: be fixed at 50 rupees. This does two things. One is the immediate effect, which is not
[Amit Varma]: even so bad. Honestly, the immediate effect is that it is first come first serve and sanitizers
[Amit Varma]: sell out at 50 rupees. And then that's it. If there's a shortage, you can't get them
[Amit Varma]: anymore, which is the situation now. But the worst effect is that had the price being allowed
[Amit Varma]: to go up to 200 or whatever, that would have incentivized manufacturers to ramp up manufacturing.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, manufacturers of other chemical products, for example, to say that let us,
[Amit Varma]: you know, find a way to make sanitizers for now, because that is where the profit margins
[Amit Varma]: are. And therefore, what would have happened is that the prices would eventually have gotten
[Amit Varma]: back to normal, because the supply shortfall would have been met by people incentivized
[Amit Varma]: by the prices. That's the beauty of prices. They carry information and incentives and
[Amit Varma]: people simply do not get this. Similarly, why I was kind of appalled by that Supreme
[Amit Varma]: Court ruling that there should be free, which in my view is basically mass murder. Because
[Amit Varma]: if you just look at the incentives, you cannot give an order to private people like they
[Amit Varma]: are your freaking slaves, or that they are your subjects to go back to that, to the term
[Amit Varma]: we used earlier, they are rational people responding to incentives who need to feed
[Amit Varma]: their families who need to pay their employees who need to pay the rent of their workplace.
[Amit Varma]: And there is no way to do that. If they start giving products for free, it doesn't make
[Amit Varma]: sense. What I vastly prefer is the solution that you have come up with. And that brings
[Amit Varma]: up issues we will also discuss. What I vastly prefer is that the state figure out a way
[Amit Varma]: to pay for them. So the incentives of the private players keep working in the right
[Amit Varma]: direction, that there is something in it for us if we keep manufacturing these. Of course,
[Amit Varma]: civil society is full of good people who are doing good things for their fellow citizens
[Amit Varma]: out of the goodness of their heart. That is great. But most of the ways in which we serve
[Amit Varma]: each other arise out of this sort of self interest. You know, people are not going to
[Amit Varma]: put sanitizers out in the market out of altruism, they're going to do it because they want to
[Amit Varma]: make a profit off it. And that's how people will get the sanitizers they need or the masks
[Amit Varma]: they need, or whatever. And and, you know, and having finished this rant before I move
[Guest]: on from the rant, by the way, good rant. I mean, if you were in my principles of economic
[Amit Varma]: class, you would have gotten full points. This is glorious. And I have, of course, learned
[Amit Varma]: a lot from you over the years in our conversations. So a formal education is not necessary. And
[Amit Varma]: this brings, I wasn't inviting you to my class summit. Don't worry, just saying well done.
[Amit Varma]: I would be the classic disruptive backbencher if I did come to your class. But having sort
[Amit Varma]: of gotten the rant out of the way, I also want to raise another question which has been
[Amit Varma]: coming up, which is, you and I, of course, are what, you know, people would apply the
[Amit Varma]: term libertarians to us, I have more and more come to object to that term or any other term,
[Amit Varma]: because I think that we think too much along tribal lines. So I don't want to be thought
[Amit Varma]: of as someone who belongs to a particular tribe or otherwise. But one thing that people
[Amit Varma]: often say and have said during the pandemic is that here is this pandemic, and you are
[Amit Varma]: supposed to hate the state and like private action, but you are actually a wonder of wonders,
[Amit Varma]: you are actually promoting coercive action by the state and recommending things like
[Amit Varma]: a coercive lockdown and so on. And why is that and I briefly want to state my position
[Amit Varma]: on that and then you know, I'm sure you'll have a deeper more nuanced take on it. But
[Amit Varma]: my take is simply this, my take is that look, you know, most libertarians would agree that
[Amit Varma]: the state is necessary for certain reasons. There is the classic liberal paradox that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, for our rights to have any meaning, we need someone to protect our rights and
[Amit Varma]: that someone can only be the state to whom we grant the monopoly on violence. And the
[Amit Varma]: existence of the states means that automatically, some of our rights are being infringed by
[Amit Varma]: the state itself, that becomes a necessary evil. Now, arguments can be made about how
[Amit Varma]: big the state should be and what the scope of the state should be. But people like you
[Amit Varma]: and me would agree that like the state in India is a weak state that does a lot of things
[Amit Varma]: badly. You and I I think would agree that any ideal state anywhere should be a strong
[Amit Varma]: state that does a few things very well, but otherwise doesn't interfere much. It's the
[Amit Varma]: opposite in India. And one of the fundamental core roles of a state is to protect the citizens,
[Amit Varma]: that is a whole raison d'etre, that is why it exists in the first place, protect the
[Amit Varma]: citizens, not just from other citizens, which is why you need the rule of law, not just
[Amit Varma]: from enemy states outside of your geographical borders, which is why you need a defense ministry,
[Amit Varma]: but also from things like a virus. And this is a classic situation where like you said,
[Amit Varma]: there is a market failure of sorts, which is natural. And therefore, the state needs
[Amit Varma]: to step in at this point and sort it out. What would your take be? Is it similar to
[Guest]: mine or? Quite similar, I would just state it a little
[Guest]: bit differently. So as a libertarian, or as a classical liberal, to me, that just simply
[Guest]: means that on the margin, I would favor liberty enhancing measures, and I would walk away
[Guest]: from coercive measures. So I have a preference for voluntary action over coercive action.
[Guest]: So that's an ideological framework, that is what I believe in. Many people don't believe
[Guest]: in that for various reasons, we can debate that later. Now, it just so happens that a
[Guest]: lot of voluntary action is negotiated very, very well through the market. Not all of it,
[Guest]: but a lot of it. And by this, this is the classic Adam Smith version of the market,
[Guest]: which is, it is an institution which aligns self-interest with social interest beautifully.
[Guest]: So going back to your hand sanitizer example, people may be selling hand sanitizer to make
[Guest]: a quick buck because the price increased, but in the process, they are supplying an
[Guest]: extremely valuable commodity in the midst of a global pandemic to the people who need
[Guest]: it the most, right? And they are doing it not out of their benevolence, they're doing
[Guest]: it probably out of their self-interest to make money. But in the process, they are serving
[Guest]: people who actually come and become their customers. So the market, nine out of 10 times
[Guest]: does a great job aligning self-interest with social interest. And in the marketplace, more
[Guest]: often than not, private costs and social costs tend to be similar. Now, as you and I have
[Guest]: talked about this before, there are cases where that doesn't happen. And these are classic
[Guest]: externality cases where we say there is a market failure, right? Air pollution is something
[Guest]: you and I have talked about before, which is a classic market failure, where it is in
[Guest]: each person's interest or incentive to pollute. But the overall outcome is so far beyond what
[Guest]: the social cost of it is so far beyond what the private cost of each person breathing
[Guest]: in that same air that there is a huge, huge externality problem. Now, let's come to the
[Guest]: pandemic. We have a very, very similar market failure in the pandemic. And frankly, because
[Guest]: we are still in an epistemic fog, and we don't know how bad it is or how bad it could be
[Guest]: or which groups it affects the most. We just don't even fully realize what that social
[Guest]: cost could be. But we at least understand conceptually that the social cost deviates
[Guest]: from the private cost that is much bigger than the private cost, that there could be
[Guest]: people who are asymptomatic who go around spreading this, right? That there could be
[Guest]: people who are symptomatic, but because of economic desperation, or some other problem,
[Guest]: are out and about working and they inadvertently spread it. So there is a question of a classic
[Guest]: market failure problem. You know, we've met the market failure. So when it comes to a
[Guest]: market failure, yes, you need some kind of government action. But we have to realize
[Guest]: that the government is not perfect. And even when we invite government action to correct
[Guest]: market failure, we need to think about the incentive problems of the government and we
[Guest]: need to think about the knowledge problems of the government, right? And those are two
[Guest]: margins where if we can streamline incentives, well, things would be better. So for instance,
[Guest]: when it comes to the knowledge problem of governments, we you and I already talked about
[Guest]: how this is best done at the most local level, which is the municipal or the panchayati raj
[Guest]: level because they have the most knowledge because what is happening in Dharavi is completely
[Guest]: different from what is happening in Sikkim, right? And so that is one way of thinking
[Guest]: about how do we further fine tune align the government structure such that it can respond
[Guest]: with the least amount of failure with the most amount of success while correcting a
[Guest]: market failure, right? The second is the incentives, which is things like you sort of talked about
[Guest]: this in your introduction, which is people are going to be blamed in government no matter
[Guest]: what, right? So there are incentives to think about what kind of risk averse measures would
[Guest]: one be more likely to take. So one is most people who are working, who are IAS officers
[Guest]: and who are formulating policy on this, they're fairly well off, they're part of the elite.
[Guest]: They have CGHS, you know, which is a central government health scheme. They're never going
[Guest]: to go to a terrible hospital for treatment. They're fairly well protected. They have piped
[Guest]: water and all of those things. Maybe they will err on the side of social distancing
[Guest]: policy, which they can follow, but no one else can follow, right? Or if someone like
[Guest]: me is formulating policy, for instance, I have a grandfather who's 102 years old. He's
[Guest]: in good health, knock on wood, but he's 102 years old. He is one of the highest risk category
[Guest]: of people in this kind of a situation. Now, someone like me, if I were the chair of a
[Guest]: bureaucrat might impose too harsh a lockdown because the person who is, who I'm trying
[Guest]: to protect is someone like my grandfather and I'm elite and I'm comfortable and I really
[Guest]: don't care about, you know, what is going to happen to migrant labor or daily wage labor.
[Guest]: So there are incentives to think about. Are the incentives aligned such that you impose
[Guest]: the least amount of total costs on your citizens or are they aligned such that you sort of,
[Guest]: you know, protect your own back, serve your own interests, even if they're personal interests
[Guest]: and impose a lot of social costs, either because you had too stringent a lockdown or no lockdown
[Guest]: at all, right? So these are some of the things to think about even while we wear our libertarian
[Guest]: hat. So overall, we want the system to be as, you know, voluntary based and low in coercion
[Guest]: as possible. But I'm afraid, I'm sorry to all the libertarians out there, we've met
[Guest]: our market failure. So we need to do something and we have the government that we have. So
[Guest]: we need to put on our public choice, political economy hats and try and think about minimizing
[Guest]: government failure and minimizing government overreach every time on the margin. We can't
[Guest]: do anything systemically.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with everything, first of all. And, and the interesting, the dilemma that I can't
[Amit Varma]: find a resolution for in my head is what you just said, that if you look at it, the extension
[Amit Varma]: of the lockdown, you know, which by the way, I think is a perfectly fine decision. I don't
[Amit Varma]: have an argument with it. But quite apart from the goodness or the badness of that,
[Amit Varma]: which we will never know, because, you know, there'll be so much that remains unseen for
[Amit Varma]: decades about the costs and the benefits. But the extension of the lockdown was almost
[Amit Varma]: a political inevitability, because, you know, the politicians would be able to cover their
[Amit Varma]: ass and say that, look, we are doing better than the rest of the world, because we put
[Amit Varma]: this lockdown in place, which is surely partly true. And therefore, we got to do more of
[Amit Varma]: it. And also because of people who will be worst hurt, the people who are really affected
[Amit Varma]: by this, like the migrant laborers and all of that, are not such an influential voice
[Amit Varma]: in politics. I don't imagine migrant laborers anywhere really count as a vote bank and certainly
[Amit Varma]: not as influential interest groups. So they will always be the ones who get shafted.
[Guest]: Yeah, so I will say one thing, I think the lockdown is a failure. Okay. The lockdown
[Guest]: would be successful only if you use the period of the lockdown to build up healthcare capacity,
[Guest]: so that when you reopen the economy slowly and steadily, you need to flatten the curve
[Guest]: a little bit less than five weeks ago. That was the whole point of the lockdown. Because
[Guest]: if you don't build up healthcare capacity during the lockdown, then whenever you reopen
[Guest]: the economy, you're in the exact same conundrum, which means technically you can never reopen
[Guest]: the economy. So we closed things down March 24. We have no greater healthcare capacity
[Guest]: today on April 17 than we had on March 24, which means we wasted a month with huge economic
[Guest]: costs and no immediate sight into when we can open things. So in that sense, I think
[Guest]: the lockdown is a complete and total failure, because I don't think the government understood
[Guest]: that at the end of the lockdown, whenever the time comes to open the economy, there
[Guest]: will be transmission, right? So there seems to be no policy around that. I have not seen
[Guest]: any state other than Kerala, at this point, trying to seriously build up healthcare capacity.
[Guest]: What states are doing is just suppressing, right? And they're like in panic situations
[Guest]: with firefighting. So Maharashtra is firefighting. We're trying to contain the problem in slums.
[Guest]: We're trying to do contact tracing. We're trying to do testing. So all of those things
[Guest]: are very important, and they're great that we're doing that. But at the end of the day,
[Guest]: if you don't increase the number of hospital beds, and you don't increase the number of
[Guest]: tests and private labs, and pharmaceutical firms which are producing medicines, then
[Guest]: you can never get out of the lockdown, right? It's never going to be a good time to get
[Guest]: out. So I will disagree with you a little bit in that I think the lockdown is a good
[Guest]: idea because we have no other choice. But I also recognize that the lockdown is a failure
[Guest]: because the most important thing, you know, union and state government should have done
[Guest]: during the lockdown. I don't see that happening other than two or three different states.
[Amit Varma]: No, I agree with you on the fact that these are all the things we needed to do during
[Amit Varma]: the lockdown. And I had actually suspended judgment on that because I don't think there's
[Amit Varma]: enough information available to me to know whether that capacity is being built. I would
[Amit Varma]: have thought it a no brainer. I know that there are lots of very smart people on advisory
[Amit Varma]: panels advising the government. But yes, there is that epistemic fog. And if they haven't
[Amit Varma]: actually put those extra beds in place or ramped up the production of masks, because
[Amit Varma]: honestly, when the lockdown ends, every freaking Indian has to be wearing a mask outdoors.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if you haven't ramped up ventilators, then I agree with you, it's pointless.
[Guest]: I'll tell you what happened in India, there will be a government mandate that says everyone
[Guest]: has to wear a mask in public. We don't have enough masks, which means some poor person
[Guest]: is going to be out and about without a mask looking for food or medicines. And then the
[Guest]: police will beat that person up. Right? So this is the way we execute things in India
[Guest]: without realizing that you can't just dictate from the top. It's not, there's no Akshaya
[Guest]: Patra. Okay. You can't say we want masks and masks will just magically appear. You need
[Guest]: to incentivize the private sector. You need to say there's an essential good, let's produce
[Guest]: masks, right? You need to say we will pay for every single person's mask who cannot
[Guest]: afford it. Masks are very cheap compared to private tests and hospital beds and things
[Guest]: like that. So civil society can help in a huge way, but we still need to have some kind
[Guest]: of a signal that here we need more masks. So we don't have that yet. I mentioned this
[Guest]: before the, you know, we have testing kits, which we've imported, which are just sitting
[Guest]: waiting for customs clearance, waiting for approvals from the drug controller, right?
[Guest]: We still have import duties on a whole number of things. Very recently, the finance minister,
[Guest]: thankfully in a wonderful move, suspended import duties on medical equipment. But we
[Guest]: just have a supply side problem on each of these things. And until we remove the roadblocks
[Guest]: for the supply side problem, we won't get an increase in supply on any of the essential
[Guest]: goods, which either help mitigate the problem, like, you know, hand sanitizers and masks,
[Guest]: or help treat the problem like hospital beds and ventilators.
[Amit Varma]: And you, in fact, recently wrote a column, which could easily have been titled the seen
[Amit Varma]: and the unseen. It referred to Bastia and his famous essay from which I got the title
[Amit Varma]: of the show and it repeated to you. Thank you. Great honor. I dedicate this show and
[Amit Varma]: your dedication to me, to Frederick Bastia himself, one of my 19th century heroes whose
[Amit Varma]: masterpiece The Law I think everyone should read and all his essays. In fact, they will
[Amit Varma]: be linked from the show notes. But meanwhile, can you sort of quickly shed light on some
[Amit Varma]: of the seen and the unseen effects of the pandemic because I just found it so delightful.
[Guest]: Oh, yeah. So you know, the classic example that Bastia gives when he talks about the
[Guest]: seen and the unseen effects is the broken window example, right? So the folklore goes
[Guest]: such that, you know, you break a window of a tailoring shop and people say that, oh,
[Guest]: this is wonderful because it's going to stimulate the economy because now someone has to spend
[Guest]: money to repair the broken window, which means the glass manufacturers and the window installer
[Guest]: and all these people will, will make money and it will stimulate the economy. So that's
[Guest]: the seen effect. The unseen effect is that had the window not been broken, there would
[Guest]: have been more money in the pocket of the tailoring facility. And maybe they could have
[Guest]: employed another employee. And maybe they could have bought another sewing machine.
[Guest]: And that would have stimulated a whole number of other important areas in the economy. And
[Guest]: it would have been a valuable, you know, spending of resources towards things that people actually
[Guest]: want rather than just breaking a window and repairing it. So breaking a window and repairing
[Guest]: it was a useful thing. We can keep stimulating the economy that way, right? But we know that
[Guest]: it's not, it's a wasteful thing. So the scene effect and the unseen effect are quite different.
[Guest]: Now, this is just one of the many, many examples that Bastia talks about. In my column, I was
[Guest]: talking about import tariffs specifically. So as I mentioned, we have very high import
[Guest]: tariffs more generally. And in the case of medical equipment, they are somewhere between
[Guest]: say 12% and 26%, depending on, you know, the CES is applied and what you're talking about
[Guest]: exactly. The testing kits, many of them are 26% tariff is applied to them. Now, as we
[Guest]: know, the reason, the ostensible reason given for import tariffs is that they protect domestic
[Guest]: industry, right? And the way they protect domestic industry is because the domestic
[Guest]: industry is not as competitive. And what we mean by competitive is it doesn't produce,
[Guest]: say testing kits with the lowest number of resources available, right? It doesn't, it's
[Guest]: more costly than people who do it abroad. But we still want to encourage domestic industry
[Guest]: even though they don't produce as effectively or as cheaply. In the process, we put in a
[Guest]: tariff and any foreign supplier who is selling to India is going to have a higher price presented
[Guest]: to the consumer. So the consumer, if they can buy from the domestic person at a hundred
[Guest]: rupees for the same thing, we'll have to pay 126 rupees to the foreign supplier. So the
[Guest]: domestic supplier seems cheap in comparison. These things are typically put in when the
[Guest]: domestic producer makes testing kits available at say 120 rupees, right? The foreign supplier
[Guest]: makes it available at a hundred rupees. So the 26 rupee tariff is going to make the domestic
[Guest]: producer seem slightly cheaper on the margin or make them more competitive on the margin.
[Guest]: Now this is encouraged saying that the domestic producer will use local resources. They will
[Guest]: employ local people and all of those good things. So that's the scene effect. The unseen
[Guest]: effect is that every single individual and lab in the country, which is buying a testing
[Guest]: kit is spending an extra 26 rupees that they could have spent on other things. They could
[Guest]: have spent that extra 26 rupees on a mask. They could have spent that extra 26 rupees
[Guest]: on food. If they had a lot of money sloshing around in their pockets, they could have given
[Guest]: that 26 rupees to someone who needed it desperately. And now all that money is spent, you know,
[Guest]: sort of propping up a domestic producer because they weren't as competitive as a foreign producer.
[Guest]: Now normally we tolerate all of this under the guise of patriotism. And the whole problem
[Guest]: is presented as a tax on the foreign supplier, you know, vis-a-vis the domestic supplier.
[Guest]: So we're, we're taxing foreigners. We're hurting foreigners. We're protecting Indians. But
[Guest]: the unseen effect is we are hurting the Indian consumer to protect the Indian producer. And
[Guest]: in this particular instance, normally this unseen effect, you know, is not visible. In
[Guest]: this particular instance of the COVID crisis, it has become extremely visible because in
[Guest]: this case, the domestic consumer are people who desperately need a test or are sick, who
[Guest]: will die waiting for a test or will transmit the virus to other people. And the producer
[Guest]: is, you know, some manufacturer. Now suddenly the tables are a little bit turned. We're
[Guest]: like, Oh, we're literally going to kill people while waiting for a test because we're not
[Guest]: allowing them to import foreign tests, which are more cheap and competitive and available
[Guest]: in larger quantities than the domestic manufacturers. So this is one instance where the pandemic
[Guest]: has made a traditionally unseen effect seen. And in fact, the result became so visible
[Guest]: that even the government has taken notice. So the finance ministry, I believe on April
[Guest]: 9th, issued a notification saying that until September 30th, they're going to suspend all
[Guest]: import tariffs on medical equipment and masks and ventilators and testing kits. And also
[Guest]: on the inputs that go into these, you know, the various equipments, because for ventilators,
[Guest]: we actually import a lot of different parts, but we might assemble it in India. So it's
[Guest]: important to also think about inputs. So the government actually made this change. So it
[Guest]: was a remarkable thing where a traditionally unseen effect has become visible. And thankfully,
[Guest]: we have made one step towards greater trade, lesser coercion, and fewer transfer of resources
[Amit Varma]: from consumers to producers. You know, I want to rant a little bit about this because this
[Amit Varma]: really makes me angry. I think import duties, all import duties without exception, are immoral.
[Amit Varma]: They are an attack on the people of your own country. And I want to talk a little bit about
[Amit Varma]: this. I'll go back to your example. Let's say that there is a sanitizer that a domestic
[Amit Varma]: producer can make for a hundred and twenty rupees. And you know, a company outside, maybe
[Amit Varma]: in China or wherever, can make for a hundred bucks. I, the consumer, can now get it for
[Amit Varma]: a hundred bucks if there are no import duties. You put an import duty of 26%, 26 rupees,
[Amit Varma]: that is 126. I have to buy from the local guy for 120. What is happening here? One,
[Amit Varma]: as you pointed out, the unseen effect is that that 20 rupees that I would have saved would
[Amit Varma]: have gone back into the economy. I would have spent it on something else. It would have
[Amit Varma]: been put to productive use in the economy. It would have generated jobs, which would
[Amit Varma]: have been productive jobs and, you know, more than made up for the loss of whatever the
[Amit Varma]: domestic industry would be. But secondly, and I want to phrase it like this, what the
[Amit Varma]: government did with an import duty was it redistributed money from the poor to the rich.
[Amit Varma]: What happened was that the poor consumer at large lost 20 rupees. It was coerced away
[Amit Varma]: from him by this government regulation and given to a rich interest group of domestic
[Amit Varma]: manufacturers. And the rich interest groups of domestic manufacturer then spends a chunk
[Amit Varma]: of that lobbying the government or bribing the government to pass the import duty in
[Amit Varma]: the first place. This is the circle that we need to watch out for. You know, the crony
[Amit Varma]: capitalist using the power of the state to redistribute money from the poor to the rich.
[Amit Varma]: And this happens in so many different ways. All protectionism, all protectionism is like
[Amit Varma]: this, you know, restricting, for example, FDI on retail, which so many of the parties
[Amit Varma]: have been for is another example of that. And they are always couched in rhetoric of
[Amit Varma]: who we are helping the domestic manufacturer. But listen, markets exist for the benefit
[Amit Varma]: of consumers, for the benefits of citizens. And all of this amounts to redistribution
[Amit Varma]: from the poor to the rich. And therefore, I hope that in time now that we have come
[Amit Varma]: to see the evil effects of these import duties, that in time, you know, we begin to cut down
[Amit Varma]: on import duties altogether.
[Guest]: I like one more thing. You said we are transferring from the poor to the rich, which is incredibly
[Guest]: true in a country like India, where you know, large number of consumers have pretty much
[Guest]: anything tend to be poorer than the manufacturers. The other thing is we're distributing from
[Guest]: a very large number of people to a very small concentration. Right. And that is also the
[Guest]: reason why some of these things persist. So it's very difficult for a large number of
[Guest]: citizens, you know, maybe a hundred thousand people in India need one of the medical equipment
[Guest]: or, you know, a mask or something that we're talking about. And it's very difficult for
[Guest]: them to coordinate and say, hey, you're robbing us of 20 rupees each. And it's much easier
[Guest]: for the six or seven manufacturers to coordinate and say, oh, we're going to get 20 rupees
[Guest]: additional from, you know, a hundred thousand consumers out there, and we can split it amongst
[Guest]: the five of us. So now how do we lobby the government? So this is a classic case of concentrated
[Guest]: benefits and diffused costs, which is why many of these things exist. So it's not just
[Guest]: a transfer from the poor to the rich, which is a morally bankrupt situation. But the reason
[Guest]: why they persist is also it's a transfer from a very large number of people who pay a small
[Guest]: fraction to a very small number of people who gain a large fraction.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And in fact, to add to that, I'd also point out that the cost is unseen in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that I, as a consumer, don't know the cost that I would have saved had the import duty
[Amit Varma]: not in place. I, for example, as a consumer certainly pay something every year for to
[Amit Varma]: keep Air India afloat. You know, I have paid something in the past to have these giant
[Amit Varma]: statues built, but I don't know what it is. It is unseen to me. And even if I knew what
[Amit Varma]: it was that, hey, Amit, you're spending a hundred rupees every year on Air India, and
[Amit Varma]: you know, a hundred rupees each on a million things like that. For the sake of that one
[Amit Varma]: hundred rupees, I would not be able to get together with all other citizens. It would
[Amit Varma]: not be incentive enough to actually spend so much time and effort. But for the person
[Amit Varma]: who is gaining from it, for Air India, it's very easy to then lobby the government.
[Guest]: They're unionized employees.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly. Who are, you know, subsisting on this coercion. But, you know, sort of,
[Amit Varma]: let's go back. And your column, of course, has more examples of this. And it's a beautiful
[Amit Varma]: column. I'll link it from the show notes. I wish I had written it.
[Guest]: All columns dedicated to Amit Verma are beautiful columns.
[Amit Varma]: This is the first column ever that has been dedicated to me, but thank you so much. It
[Amit Varma]: should be dedicated to Bastia, not to me.
[Guest]: No, no. Yes, I do mention Bastia in the column. But a conversation with you got me thinking
[Guest]: about this. So Amit and I had chatted sometime in the morning, just before I started working
[Guest]: on the column. And something Amit said to me, you know, got me thinking in that direction.
[Guest]: And I was already thinking about import duties. And I was like, very frustrated with the fact
[Guest]: that there are testing kits stuck at ports because the drug controller has not approved
[Guest]: it and, you know, things like that. So that's what instigated me to write this, which is
[Guest]: why it is dedicated to Amit. Yes, all great ideas. We are all riding on the coattails
[Guest]: of Bastia.
[Amit Varma]: We are riding on the coattails of Bastia. And at this point, I must point out, I must
[Amit Varma]: retrospectively dedicate my last column to you, because it was about the flailing state.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, I first learned about that great 2009 paper by Land Pritchett because
[Amit Varma]: of you, you introduced me to that paper. And I want to now sort of turn to that the argument
[Amit Varma]: I made in that column, which will be linked in the show notes, is basically that this
[Amit Varma]: temporal passing, hopefully passing disaster of COVID-19 has also shed light on a deeper
[Amit Varma]: underlying disaster, which we have completely normalized, which is a failure of the Indian
[Amit Varma]: state. The term Land Pritchett used for it was flailing state, which is when, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the head of the state, the brain of the state has no connection with any of the bodily organs,
[Amit Varma]: which we have actually seen in practice, where after the lockdown was actually called, there
[Amit Varma]: was so much police brutality across the country, because they simply hadn't got the instructions
[Amit Varma]: that essential services to be kept open, people can go out to buy food, etc, etc. And the
[Amit Varma]: larger point I was making, and again, something that I get emotive about and feel strongly
[Amit Varma]: about is that, you know, there has been a huge, not just state failure, but moral failure
[Amit Varma]: over the last 70 years. And what we have done to a poor in the fact that we are still a
[Amit Varma]: poor country 72 years after independence, I think the a couple of the stats I cited
[Amit Varma]: in my column is that every day, every day in India, 3000 children die of starvation
[Amit Varma]: of not getting enough food, one fourth of all Indian children are malnourished. And
[Amit Varma]: honestly, you know, I can cite figures from various fields, you can look around you look
[Amit Varma]: what is being done to our farmers, you look what is being done to our women, you know,
[Amit Varma]: perennial second class citizens, and a layer of pain that lies beneath every other crisis
[Amit Varma]: that you can name, whether it's a jobs crisis or the farming crisis. And all of this points
[Amit Varma]: to sort of the failure of the state and the way in which society runs itself despite the
[Amit Varma]: state, as we have seen in all the volunteer efforts coming out, coming up across the country
[Amit Varma]: to help the migrant laborers just to take a small example. Now, my sort of related question
[Amit Varma]: and is that, look, you know, you and I would both agree that part of this failure lies
[Amit Varma]: in the way that we think about it, that we think as men of system to use Adam Smith's
[Amit Varma]: term. And we think in paternalistic terms, that if we give handouts and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: then we can solve the problem of poverty, which is how we know that it cannot be solved
[Amit Varma]: that we know that there is, you know, a disconnect between there is a trade off between growth
[Amit Varma]: and redistribution. And that 1% of GDP growth lifts 2 million people out of poverty, that
[Amit Varma]: economic freedom and allowing society to function well is the biggest driver of growth and therefore
[Amit Varma]: of people coming out of poverty and paternalistic policies have a very limited impact. Now,
[Amit Varma]: in terms of dealing with the current COVID-19 crisis, you have proposed as a short term
[Amit Varma]: measure, a number of policies which otherwise we would frown upon as paternalistic and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, giving a man a fish instead of teaching him how to fish, for example, a time bound
[Amit Varma]: UBI. So explain to me your thinking on this, that, you know, policies which we would never
[Amit Varma]: consider to and which we know would not work for this larger ongoing normalized disaster,
[Amit Varma]: that is poverty in the Indian state, we are seeing them as a short term fix now, is it
[Amit Varma]: an extension of the fact that in this crisis, the primary duty of the Indian state is to
[Amit Varma]: protect the citizen. And if those measures like a lockdown have economic costs, those
[Amit Varma]: have to be ameliorated by the state. Is that where the thinking is coming from?
[Guest]: Yeah, so three things, you know, you've you've talked about, I think, three distinct issues
[Guest]: with the state. So the first one, the flailing state, I completely agree with you. I mean,
[Guest]: that's a fantastic paper by Lant. He's written a lot on this. Alex and I wrote about this
[Guest]: too. Our basic point, which, you know, you agree with, is that the Indian state tries
[Guest]: to do too much, too soon. It tries to regulate areas that it has no capacity to regulate.
[Guest]: It tries to monitor things that it simply cannot do. And it does too little of what
[Guest]: it is supposed to do, which is provide law and order and provide public goods and security
[Guest]: and things like that. In fact, one great line from Ed Glazer, the economist, when he wrote
[Guest]: about state capacity in an essay, he said, a country that cannot provide clean water
[Guest]: should not be in the business of regulating film dialogue. And you and I, as, you know,
[Guest]: classical liberals will agree that no one should be in the business of regulating film
[Guest]: dialogue anyway. But on the margin, what he was talking about was state capacity is limited
[Guest]: resource like anything else. And the Indian government spends all its capacity on all
[Guest]: these useless things, which it cannot possibly accomplish, right? Instead of actually providing
[Guest]: clean water, basic public goods, sewage systems, you know, maybe like a primary education system,
[Guest]: things that we associate with the government doing even in your and my version of a limited
[Guest]: government. So our government is completely like, so in the process, it has spread itself
[Guest]: too thin and it's flailing. So the Indian government has labor regulation, which the
[Guest]: most advanced countries in the world don't have and cannot hope to enforce. And so what
[Guest]: happens as a consequence is that the Indian government also doesn't enforce all its regulation.
[Guest]: It just does it in a discretionary and pernicious fashion. So when it wants to come down hard
[Guest]: on some manufacturer, they will send the labor inspector and, you know, sort of list the
[Guest]: 30 violations and try to put that person in jail or extract a huge fine. So that's how
[Guest]: the Indian government operates. So I'm completely with you. I think I wrote a similar column
[Guest]: on this. I think it's called the Upside Down Indian State. I'll share it with you so that
[Amit Varma]: you can put it in the show notes.
[Guest]: We can link it in the show notes.
[Guest]: Yeah. So that's one part of it. And there I'm in complete agreement with you. The second
[Guest]: part of it is what is the appropriate role of the state in peace times and what is the
[Guest]: appropriate role of the state in pandemic times? Now, I completely agree with you that
[Guest]: over 70 years because of terrible socialist laws and paternalistic laws and, you know,
[Guest]: us just trying to stifle the market system and voluntary action at each and every stage,
[Guest]: we have completely suppressed private enterprise. And in the process, we've impoverished hundreds
[Guest]: of millions of people. So on that, I think there is no debate between you and me. And
[Guest]: I think 90 percent of the economists agree with us. But the fact of the matter is we
[Guest]: are currently living in a country of 1.3 billion people where 275 million are below the poverty
[Guest]: line and the poverty line is 1.25 dollars a day. So these people subsist on less than
[Guest]: 3000 rupees a month. OK, and that's something we need to seriously think about. The second
[Guest]: is even people above the poverty line because of really stupid policies like our labor regulation,
[Guest]: like our industrial licensing, most of them work in the informal sector, which means they
[Guest]: don't have the safety of contracts like, you know, people like me, for instance. So I have
[Guest]: a contract with my employer. You know, they can't fire me if I'm working remotely. And
[Guest]: right now I'm not able to produce anything because of the covid crisis. You know, I still
[Guest]: get a paycheck. Most people living and working in India do not have that security. When you
[Guest]: work in the informal sector, you also don't get employee insurance. You don't get pension
[Guest]: provident fund, you know, a whole host of things. And a very large proportion of the
[Guest]: people in the informal sector are actually daily wage laborers, which means if I can't
[Guest]: go to work today because I have a fever or my family member is sick, then I don't get
[Guest]: paid anything and I need to go to bed, you know, starving. So that's the circumstance
[Guest]: we have created for about three to four hundred million people. So these people in India are
[Guest]: above the poverty line because they work very hard. They work long hours. They work as daily
[Guest]: wage laborers, usually in the informal sector. But the flip side to that is the moment you
[Guest]: have something like demonetization or a lockdown to mitigate the covid pandemic, these people
[Guest]: are not going to get paid. So they are not a group that has savings. Right. So, for instance,
[Guest]: if I didn't get paid right now, I'm an economist. I've come from a lot of privilege. I have
[Guest]: some savings in the bank that tied me over for X number of months. There's a large group
[Guest]: in India, three to four hundred million people who cannot go through three weeks of a lockdown
[Guest]: because they don't have savings to sustain them for three weeks. And this is no fault
[Guest]: of theirs. It's not like they did poor financial planning and ate too much popcorn when they
[Guest]: went to watch a movie. Right. They just don't make enough money. They live on subsistence
[Guest]: day to day. If they earn today, they can feed their family. If they don't earn tomorrow,
[Guest]: they can't feed their family. Now, this group has suddenly it's very vulnerable to economic
[Guest]: stress even in normal times. And they get pushed to the poverty line or below poverty
[Guest]: line when there is a huge shock. So, you know, when everything gets locked down because of
[Guest]: pollution in Delhi, that is a big shock. Not only do these people get sick, they also don't
[Guest]: have the ability to go to work when things get locked down because of demonetization
[Guest]: or a covid lockdown. Same problem. So they're very vulnerable to economic stress and they
[Guest]: slide back into poverty. So poverty is not a fixed concept of I'm poor or I'm not poor.
[Guest]: It's all circumstances. Right. So currently, in addition to the 275 million who are below
[Guest]: poverty line and they are very well targeted, we have a pretty good idea of who these people
[Guest]: are and a lot of policies targeted towards them. You and I can debate the effectiveness
[Guest]: of those policies, but the government has at least made an attempt to identify these
[Guest]: people. The 400 million people who are on the cusp of economic stress being pushed one
[Guest]: way or another. So when markets flourish, you know, they get lifted out of poverty and
[Guest]: when markets can't flourish, they get pushed back into poverty. This group is invisible,
[Guest]: right? Or unseen to go back to our theme. And we do need to think about them. We definitely
[Guest]: need to think about them in pandemic times, even if we don't think about them in peace
[Guest]: times. But I think overall, we need some kind of a sensible solution for that. So in the
[Guest]: post, I had suggested a UBI. I did not think of it as a paternalistic act. I thought of
[Guest]: it as a fundamental moral duty of the state to make sure that its citizens do not starve.
[Guest]: And the reason the citizens are in that position in the first place is because both as a government
[Guest]: and as a society, we have consistently looked the other way when it comes to the informal
[Guest]: labour sector, right? We are not very good about, you know, even the most elite among
[Guest]: us. How many people are offering health benefits to their household help? I don't know, right?
[Guest]: I would assume a very small percentage. So it's not just the government, it's also the
[Guest]: rest of us. As a country, as a society, we have made these people invisible in the system
[Guest]: and we just operate business as usual and we look the other way. When we pass a slum,
[Guest]: we just hold our nose up and, you know, sort of, we carry on with things. And right now,
[Guest]: the pandemic has cracked open this sort of, you know, underbelly of the Indian political
[Guest]: economy, which we always pretend doesn't exist. So slums is another problem. As you and I
[Guest]: have talked about this before, slums are a consequence of terrible urban land regulation
[Guest]: and housing policy. That's why slums exist. Bombay would not function without slums. No
[Guest]: big city in India can function without slums because 42% of the households in Bombay live
[Guest]: in slum or slum-like arrangements, informal arrangements, but they are the bulk of the
[Guest]: labor that runs the Mumbai economy, right? So we need to think about these people, but
[Guest]: we don't address these issues normally. Now that there is an outbreak in Dharavi, suddenly
[Guest]: we're like, oh my God, we need a slum policy. But historically, we've not addressed it.
[Guest]: And now helping these people, we can't say that's paternalism or that's a handout. At
[Guest]: this moment in a pandemic, it is absolutely our fundamental moral responsibility to ensure
[Guest]: the people we have personally, and as a society kept impoverished, do not die of starvation
[Guest]: or do not die of disease. So that's my response to that. When it comes to your third question
[Guest]: of do I think a UBI should carry on beyond this? Now, in normal times, both you and I
[Guest]: are not in favor of transfers from the government to citizens. We are not in favor of subsidies
[Guest]: and things like that. Now, as an economist, I will say that an income support, which is
[Guest]: not means tested, that is we're not saying you get it if you qualify, if you're below
[Guest]: a certain income or if you have a certain profession. So basically we just give it to
[Guest]: everyone of a particular category. Those tend to be the cleanest transfers. They have the
[Guest]: least distortions, right? So as an economist, I'm a huge fan of universal or quasi-universal
[Guest]: income and that being given in the form of a direct cash transfer, simply because it's
[Guest]: the cleanest instrument that we can think of. It has the fewest price distortions. So
[Guest]: it's much better than giving agricultural subsidy, water subsidy, food subsidy, fertilizer
[Guest]: subsidy and all the million other distortive subsidies that we have. So that's the economist
[Guest]: part of it. The other aspect I want to shine light on when it comes to income support as
[Guest]: an economist, and we are seeing this happening the world over, the market process, while
[Guest]: it's incredibly valuable in pushing people towards prosperity, it is not seamless and
[Guest]: it is not even in its effects, right? There are business cycles and we've seen this happening
[Guest]: in developed countries because of globalizations. There are certain areas such as manufacturing,
[Guest]: which have taken a huge hit and the people who are working in those sectors suddenly
[Guest]: find themselves unemployed, right? And they are not at any personal fault. They're not
[Guest]: lazy. It's not that they don't work hard. It's just the global forces of the market
[Guest]: are so big that their firm had to move its manufacturing operations to China or something
[Guest]: like that. And as a society, we need to think about how do we support people for a short
[Guest]: period of time or in times when there are business cycles such that they can retool
[Guest]: and get back into the economy as opposed to them losing their job and then suddenly being
[Guest]: out of work. Now, even someone like me, as we talked about this, I come from a lot of
[Guest]: privilege, but I have hyper-specialized. I have just been in academia my whole life.
[Guest]: I don't know very much beyond economics and public policy. If you asked me to go and work
[Guest]: tomorrow and say, hey, your university is closed, but we need a lot of masks. Why don't
[Guest]: you go and work in a factory that produces masks? I mean, they'll throw me out. I don't
[Guest]: know how to sew or I know how to sew very badly. So it's going to take me some time
[Guest]: to retool, even if I'm willing to take on a different job, which is in manufacturing
[Guest]: or a different kind of job writing outside of academy or something like that. So we need
[Guest]: to think about that. So the market is not seamless. It comes with business cycles. And
[Guest]: this is true both in India, where we're looking at unproductive sectors of the economy, like
[Guest]: agriculture and people moving to manufacturing or services, people moving from unproductive
[Guest]: rural areas to urban areas. Income support hugely helps people when they're making these
[Guest]: transitions and these transitions are extremely necessary when we think about a functional
[Guest]: market system. Can some of these transitions be provided by civil society? Absolutely.
[Guest]: I don't think income support should mean that civil society cannot participate. Second,
[Guest]: I don't think income support should be very high. The kind of income support I'm talking
[Guest]: about is 3000 rupees a month. That's the poverty line, right? So it is not enough to incentivize
[Guest]: anyone to just stop working and hang out at home. It's just about going to buy you food
[Guest]: and shelter, if at all. So I don't think there is too much moral hazard and I don't think
[Guest]: there's too much paternalism. And the really rich people who spend 3000 rupees on a meal
[Guest]: or a drink, who don't need it, will not get it anyway. So I think it's a very clean instrument
[Guest]: and I think it's necessary. I don't think this is a paternalistic act. I think if you
[Guest]: and I are to take the functioning of the market seriously, we also need to think about business
[Guest]: cycles. We need to talk about sectoral shifts. We need to think about how people in a society
[Guest]: which is civilized, which has deep division of labor and specialization, are not going
[Guest]: to be able to transition from one area to another area overnight and seamlessly. And
[Guest]: according to me, the cleanest instrument I can think of in these circumstances is some
[Guest]: kind of direct cash transfer, basic income support.
[Amit Varma]: Okay. So I have a bunch of thoughts on all of that. To begin with, I'd like to share
[Guest]: an image with you, which are...
[Guest]: I feel like we can finally disagree on something. So I'm looking forward to this. We agree far
[Amit Varma]: too much.
[Amit Varma]: The disagreement comes at the end. In fact, you know, when people ask me that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: why don't you get people on your show you disagree with? I say, look, I disagree with
[Amit Varma]: almost everyone who comes on my show, with the exception being Shruti Rajgopalan. So
[Amit Varma]: boom, that achievement unlocked. But anyway, my first observation is not a disagreement.
[Amit Varma]: It's in fact, it strengthens your case, which is an image that our mutual friend Kumar Anand
[Amit Varma]: once told me about, where Kumar used to live in Mumbai in those days. Now, of course, he's
[Amit Varma]: in Delhi. And Kumar was once chatting with a taxi driver, and the taxi driver told him
[Amit Varma]: about the circumstances of his life in Mumbai. Obviously, he was a migrant from somewhere
[Amit Varma]: else, I forget where, UP, Bihar, wherever, to Mumbai. Now, the taxi driver lived with
[Amit Varma]: seven other people, eight people to a room. So they shared this narrow cloistered space.
[Amit Varma]: And when the time came for him to work, he got up from sleep, and he went to work. Now
[Amit Varma]: here's the kicker. There were actually 16 people who lived in that room, but they slept
[Amit Varma]: in shifts. So you'd have eight people who would have it for half the day. And then those
[Amit Varma]: eight people would go out to work to drive the taxis or whatever other work they do.
[Amit Varma]: And the other eight would come back from their shift, whatever it was they were doing, and
[Amit Varma]: they would sleep. So in a room, you managed to pack in eight people. And then you're there
[Amit Varma]: actually 16 people. Now what happens when you have a lockdown? What happens when you
[Amit Varma]: have a lockdown is, first of all, none of these guys has work, right? None of these
[Amit Varma]: guys has work, they're all out of work. They're probably people who subsist on maybe they
[Amit Varma]: have a week's money in advance at most, they don't have savings. And now instead of eight
[Amit Varma]: to a room, there are 16 to a room. They can't even lie down in their own space because their
[Amit Varma]: own space was, you know, had that temporal limitation. And the thought that strikes me
[Amit Varma]: here is who let them down? In my mind, if I go to root causes, I would say again, it's
[Amit Varma]: that same thing. It's a failing state that let them down that over 72 years we have with
[Amit Varma]: you know, our crony socialism and our distrust of private enterprise, we have not allowed
[Amit Varma]: our society to progress to the level where everyone can meet what the philosopher Harry
[Amit Varma]: Frankfurt calls a doctrine of sufficiency. None of these people meet that and all of
[Amit Varma]: these 16 people may be above the poverty line. So when a pandemic happens, and there's a
[Amit Varma]: lockdown, do we owe them something? And I agree with you, it's a moral imperative, we
[Amit Varma]: owe them something. But I will also, you know, frame it by alluding to something the great
[Amit Varma]: farmer Sharad Joshi once said. Sharad Joshi, of course, is one of my favorite 20th century
[Amit Varma]: leaders. You can hear a bit more about in the only Hindi episode I've done on my podcast,
[Guest]: which is episode 86 of the scene and the unseen. It is my most favorite scene in the unseen
[Amit Varma]: episode of all time. Which is the first, you know, I should do more Hindi episodes, but
[Guest]: that is with the farmer leader. It wasn't because it was in Hindi. It was because of
[Amit Varma]: Gunwant Patil, who is just such a clear thinker. So that episode was with the farmer leader
[Amit Varma]: Gunwant Patil, who was an old associate of Sharad Joshi. And he spoke about Sharad Joshi's
[Amit Varma]: fantastic phrase, negative subsidy. Now, what is a negative subsidy? We all talk and this
[Amit Varma]: is extremely unfair. We talk unfairly of farmers, of people who are subsidized by the state.
[Amit Varma]: This is rubbish. In Sharad Joshi's words, farmers are actually hurt so much by the bad
[Amit Varma]: policies of the state and do go back and listen to that episode. And one more I'll link from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes are hurt so much by the acts of the state that they actually lose money.
[Amit Varma]: And Sharad Joshi calls this the negative subsidy. And Joshiji was against all forms of paternalism.
[Amit Varma]: But nevertheless, you know, if you look at the manifestos that he drew up for the Shetkari
[Amit Varma]: Sanghatana, the party which he founded and ran so well, everything there was promoting
[Amit Varma]: freedom and anti-paternalistic and talking about removal of controls and blah, blah,
[Amit Varma]: blah. But there was one thing which on the surface sounds paternalistic, which was farm
[Amit Varma]: loan waivers. But it sounds paternalistic on the surface. Joshiji's point was that look,
[Amit Varma]: this is a compensation for the negative subsidy that we have been subjected to all our lives.
[Amit Varma]: And in his mind, it was, you know, a temporary measure that you have to do only side by side
[Amit Varma]: with all the other reforms. And how farm loan waivers, of course, used in modern India,
[Amit Varma]: are in a paternalistic way without making any of those structural reforms, and therefore
[Amit Varma]: they do not work. Now, I want to sort of when we are talking about markets, and since agriculture
[Amit Varma]: is what we brought the subject to, I also want to point out that when we liberalized
[Amit Varma]: and it was a very limited liberalization, sadly, in 91, the one sector that we did not
[Amit Varma]: touch was agriculture, it wasn't liberalized at all. I've had episodes speaking in depth
[Amit Varma]: about this. And that is a one sector where there is the largest amount of distress. So
[Amit Varma]: I would still hold that in the long run, you have to let voluntary action play a role that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, people are not costs, they are resources. And that if you look at what has happened
[Amit Varma]: in other free economies, and in the sectors that we did free up, they have done far better.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, in agriculture, they continue to sort of do not so well. And here, I would
[Amit Varma]: again, you know, go back to you know, when we talk about UBI, and when we talk about
[Amit Varma]: helping poor people with redistribution, I would point out here, there is a cost to this.
[Amit Varma]: And it is both a moral and a financial cost. The moral cost, of course, is coercion. Every
[Amit Varma]: compassionate act of government is founded on coercion, because the government takes
[Amit Varma]: its taxes by coercive means. So that is a moral cost. And it's a moral cost, we should
[Amit Varma]: acknowledge while talking about what government action is justified and is not justified.
[Amit Varma]: I would, for example, say that the rule of law is justified, that coercion is justified
[Amit Varma]: for that it is not justified for building 100 meter statue, or for spending 1000s of
[Amit Varma]: crores in advertising, government services, not the case, irrelevant. Leave that aside
[Amit Varma]: for a moment. But the financial cost, you know, I had Ajay Shah and Vijay Kelkar on
[Amit Varma]: my show a few months back. And in fact,
[Guest]: that book is really fantastic. I think everybody must read In Service of the Republic.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, they wrote a brilliant book called In Service of the Republic, which I totally second
[Amit Varma]: what you just said, everyone should read that. And a concept that they very clearly elaborated
[Amit Varma]: upon at length is a marginal cost of public funds, which is for every one rupee spent
[Amit Varma]: by the government, the cost of the economy is that of three rupees, I mean, between two
[Amit Varma]: and a half to three and a half in India, but you can approximate that to three rupees.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not just if you give a handout of one rupee to someone, the cost to the rest
[Amit Varma]: of the rest of society at large for off that one rupee is three rupees for a variety of
[Amit Varma]: reasons, which the book elaborates upon.
[Guest]: Yes. And in the scheme of things, UBI is on the lower end of that cost, because it's much
[Amit Varma]: cleaner than most other subsidies. But there is a certain cost of public funds, no question.
[Amit Varma]: Sure. So now the point that I'm getting to with regard to UBI is that I would actually
[Amit Varma]: be okay with UBI, if we make the assumption that look, in a poor country, there is immediate
[Amit Varma]: distress that you have to relieve. And therefore, the UBI works for that. But the caveats I
[Amit Varma]: would put is that it has to come in place of all the other failed paternalism that effectively
[Amit Varma]: makes us that effectively makes us a predatory state. I do not see that happening in the
[Amit Varma]: political economy. And be in a case like this, while I agree that it is a moral imperative
[Amit Varma]: that we have to make sure nobody starves. I mean, that is regardless of context, that
[Amit Varma]: is regardless of COVID, no one should starve. But then the point is that, and this sort
[Amit Varma]: of leads me to the next question, but we'll come to that next.
[Guest]: Hang on one second. You know, I don't want to keep peddling all my columns. But my argument,
[Guest]: I have written against UBI in India, though I'm a big fan of UBI overall. And my argument
[Guest]: was very similar to yours, which is in India, normally, UBI should be a substitute for all
[Guest]: our other bad, you know, subsidies. So what we should do is we should add up the cost
[Guest]: of all those subsidies, we should scrap all of them, and whatever money is remaining in
[Guest]: that pot, we should say, okay, what is the fiscally responsible, you know, income support
[Guest]: that we can provide from that. What India has done instead is it announced quasi UBIs
[Guest]: just before the last general election, and it didn't scrap any of the subsidies. So I
[Guest]: think the title of that column was UBI is universally botched by Indians. And I was
[Guest]: saying something very similar to what you're saying, which is, we don't want to end up
[Guest]: in a situation where we give a UBI and all these other subsidies and keep compounding
[Guest]: the problem more and more. So I very much agree with you, it has to be a substitute,
[Guest]: it can't be an addition. I think it's a very much, it's a cleaner substitute. And the other
[Guest]: thing I would add is, we need to keep it relatively low that it doesn't turn into a moral hazard
[Guest]: problem. And the moral hazard is never from the poor in our country, it's always from
[Guest]: the rich. And I don't think the UBI will, will subsidize anything for the rich. So you
[Amit Varma]: know, I think we can, we can stay away from that.
[Amit Varma]: I agree with that in theory. But you know, the thing is that again, it goes back to the
[Amit Varma]: public choice issue of incentives. The predatory state is never going to reduce any of its
[Amit Varma]: predation. So if a UBI is added, it's not going to be as if you decide, okay, we'll
[Amit Varma]: get rid of all the other subsidies, and we'll put the money in a pool and let's do a UBI
[Amit Varma]: from that. That's not realistic, that's not going to happen. And you will just increase
[Amit Varma]: the fiscal burden, which of course means that one rupee of state spending is equal to you
[Amit Varma]: know, a cost of three rupees to society. And that cost of three rupees to society then
[Amit Varma]: accumulates and prevents society from advancing freely and helping itself because ultimately,
[Amit Varma]: as we have seen, mainly society helps itself in spite of the state.
[Guest]: So I have a slightly more optimistic view on how this can happen. And you know, just
[Guest]: bear with me. And this is obviously, there are some huge assumptions I'm making, but
[Guest]: hear me out anyway. Now, I think it's a good idea to introduce a UBI kind of income support
[Guest]: during COVID. Because once you start giving people checks that get into their bank accounts,
[Guest]: it's very difficult to take it away. But to be fiscally responsible, because there are
[Guest]: only so many resources and the government can't keep, you know, raising more and more
[Guest]: revenue, it's already finding it hard to raise revenue. At some point, something has to give,
[Guest]: and it would be very difficult to take away the UBI support, so other cross subsidies
[Guest]: will go. That is my optimistic version of this problem. Now, I understand that that
[Guest]: may not happen, or it may take too long to happen. But I think the UBI helps us get around
[Guest]: that problem at least a little bit. Maybe I'm being too optimistic for Amit Verma, but
[Amit Varma]: I will still hold on to this optimism.
[Amit Varma]: You are almost being as optimist as the communists were, that everything will work just fine.
[Amit Varma]: But incentives, incentives. No, no, I'm just kidding. So let's sort of I mean, I will suspend
[Amit Varma]: my judgment on that. And I hope you are right. And let's move on from that. I have two broad
[Amit Varma]: areas I want to talk to you about. But before I do, you know, I should clarify for people
[Amit Varma]: listening in that, oh, what are these heartless people talking about? People should not be
[Amit Varma]: given money and UBI is this idea, or a heartless person, speak for yourself, speak for myself.
[Amit Varma]: And the whole point is that we cannot judge policies by their intentions, but by their
[Amit Varma]: outcomes. And therefore, we have to take a good hard look at all policies according to
[Amit Varma]: the effects that they will have, particularly what I call the unseen effects, you know,
[Amit Varma]: as in the price controls we discussed earlier, who would object to everybody getting sanitizers
[Amit Varma]: for cheap. But what happens if you fix the price is that nobody gets them. And you have
[Amit Varma]: to look a little deeper. And, you know, I would still say a small income support is
[Guest]: slightly different from price and quantity controls. But you and I agree on on what margins
[Guest]: they're different. But I just want to, I want to flag that. And I, you know, I'm not a big
[Guest]: fan of income support in developed countries or in Scandinavian countries. I think there's
[Guest]: a genuine model hazard problem. I think there's a question of, you know, disincentivizing
[Guest]: productive labor force and things like that. In India, we're talking about this at the
[Guest]: subsistence and starvation level. So I find it very difficult. Maybe I have to turn my
[Guest]: libertarian card in to the libertarian policemen out there. But, you know, I still think we
[Guest]: have to figure something out because their impoverishment is not their fault, but our
[Guest]: failure as a government and society.
[Amit Varma]: I think I would, you know, go back to Sharad Joshi ji to think about this, where Joshi
[Amit Varma]: ji's formulation was that, look, we need to make all these structural changes and paternalism
[Amit Varma]: cannot work. However, as a short term anesthetic, while you make those changes, you better compensate
[Amit Varma]: us for the misery that we have had to go through for all these decades, by at least giving
[Amit Varma]: us these waivers now and never again, because once you make the structural changes, we won't
[Guest]: need them. And that's the hope that India is so rich that it doesn't need this kind
[Guest]: of income support. Income support is required when people are living on subsistence levels,
[Guest]: they have no savings to fall back upon. You know, any kind of economic distress immediately
[Guest]: pushes them into bankruptcy or they need to sell their land and their wives' jewelry.
[Amit Varma]: Those are the kinds of circumstances we're talking about.
[Amit Varma]: I agree. But my whole point is that those circumstances are brought about by and persist
[Guest]: by pernicious regulation.
[Amit Varma]: Yes. And the point is, my worry is that, you know, this will again become a paternalistic,
[Amit Varma]: patronizing, sop thrown to them without any of those structural changes being made. And
[Amit Varma]: then it becomes a trap that they remain trapped in, much as has happened in agriculture. But
[Amit Varma]: let's move on from that. You know, I have a couple of larger questions, which I think
[Amit Varma]: we can finally begin to agree on something again.
[Guest]: I'm surprised, you know, I always thought we agree too much. I'm glad we found some
[Amit Varma]: point of disagreement. This is great.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, actually, I remember the only...
[Guest]: I should put on a t-shirt, I disagree with Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Well, you know, I think the whole freaking world is a market for that t-shirt in that
[Amit Varma]: case. But yeah, so good luck with that.
[Guest]: And I'll make a lot of money selling the t-shirt.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Just saying.
[Amit Varma]: So this is kind of sort of the next thing I'd like to talk about, which is essentially
[Amit Varma]: that what we see in many crisis of whatever sort, whether it's a pandemic sort or a war
[Amit Varma]: sort or just an economic downturn sort, is that the government will use a crisis as an
[Amit Varma]: excuse or rather the state will use a crisis as an excuse to take even more power than
[Amit Varma]: it has in, quote unquote, peacetime. And those powers persist after the crisis is over.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you know, in wartime, a government could hypothetically take over powers which
[Amit Varma]: affect your privacy and which affect your freedoms.
[Amit Varma]: And they would say, you know, it's a freedom versus security thing. We are in war. So freedoms
[Amit Varma]: are not that important. And in peacetime, we'll see. But in peacetime, things never
[Amit Varma]: go back to normal. Do you see that there's a risk of that happening during this crisis?
[Guest]: And if so, in what ways?
[Guest]: That keeps me up at night. So, you know, in general, I think emergency powers, they tend
[Guest]: to be draconian. We already have a draconian Indian state, but emergency powers tend to
[Guest]: give more discretion to the state, more power to the state to really infringe on private
[Guest]: activity. And it's not clear to me that that goes away easily. Now, in India, you know,
[Guest]: when you and I recorded the episode with Alex, I don't remember verbatim what he said, but
[Guest]: when you asked him for his thoughts on Indian society and Indian state, he said, Indian
[Guest]: people tolerate too much abuse from their state or something like that, right? Something
[Amit Varma]: to that effect.
[Amit Varma]: About how we are a tolerant nation. And that episode, by the way, will be recorded in early
[Amit Varma]: Feb, but it will release now in June and it has nothing to do with COVID. But I don't
[Amit Varma]: think it will be dated because our subject is not dated.
[Guest]: Because we are timeless, Alex and I. No, it's because, so he said that, and I agree with
[Guest]: him. The Indian state already has taken such extraordinary powers and had such major infringements
[Guest]: on individual liberty. We don't even realize when the state is imposing more stress on
[Guest]: us. And I'm very worried that COVID will do that. I'll tell you a couple of areas where
[Guest]: I'm particularly worried. One major problem we have, and this goes back to the head of
[Guest]: the show when we talked about healthcare capacity. So Alex and I have written about what kind
[Guest]: of pandemic policies we need in developing countries in the absence of healthcare capacity.
[Guest]: So we don't have enough testing kits. We already know that. One way by which Kerala has had
[Guest]: success and other states should emulate is contact tracing, right? So the state is going
[Guest]: to come and it's going to ask you your travel history. It's going to ask you every single
[Guest]: person you've met. It's going to ask you who you shook hands with, and then it's going
[Guest]: to go to each and every one of those people. And if anyone's affected, they're going to
[Guest]: take them away from their family or their neighborhood. They're going to isolate them.
[Guest]: This is an enormous infringement on individual liberty, right? We are tolerating it in a
[Guest]: pandemic because we live in very difficult circumstances. We live in very dense urban
[Guest]: environments. We don't have a good culture of social distancing because of our lack of
[Guest]: resources. We have intergenerational cohabitation. So it's very difficult to socially distance
[Guest]: from people who are elderly and could be at risk. So we are tolerating this kind of infringement,
[Guest]: but I don't think it is a good idea ever for the state to know where I have been, what
[Guest]: I have done, who I've met, who I shook hands with last. This is a really big problem. But
[Guest]: contact tracing is one of the very few mechanisms we have as a substitute for wide scale or
[Guest]: large scale testing, which we cannot implement in India. So in an ideal world, we'd be like
[Guest]: South Korea, right? We conduct millions of tests and people just go, they test, they
[Guest]: get tested positive or negative and accordingly they isolate or they don't isolate. In India,
[Guest]: we don't have that. In fact, we've had people lie about their travel history, right? We
[Guest]: had the infamous Kanika Kapoor, who's the singer who came and attended four weddings.
[Guest]: She lied about her travel history. She did not quarantine. She's created a racket at
[Guest]: a government hospital in Lucknow where they tried to isolate her. So the Indian elite
[Guest]: can be very badly behaved. The Indian, the non-elite, the poor, very often they're not
[Guest]: in circumstances to isolate. They're like, I'm the sole breadwinner of the family or
[Guest]: I'm the only one who can look after my parents, right? If I leave, there's no one to look
[Guest]: after my kid. So these kinds of infringement on individual liberty, I'm not a fan of, and
[Guest]: I would really like to not see this persist. We're also getting into huge privacy issues.
[Guest]: If you look at contact tracing through mobile phones, right? I was told, I don't know how
[Guest]: to verify this information because I'm not a computer science person, but I was told
[Guest]: that the government apps, which are the diagnostic apps, they register your location through
[Guest]: GPS and Bluetooth long after you've done the diagnostic test. That is something that worries
[Guest]: me deeply. So these sorts of things I'm not comfortable with. I don't see what the alternative
[Guest]: is. The alternative is excellent healthcare capacity and everyone having a large house,
[Guest]: lots of square footage, clean pipe water and soap and hand sanitizer to self-isolate while
[Guest]: they comfortably live off their savings. But we don't have any of them, let alone all of
[Guest]: the above. So these are the sorts of spaces where we are ceding a lot of control to the
[Guest]: state and I'm not a fan of it persisting. And in the United States, it's passed the
[Guest]: CARES Act. It's an extraordinary economic stimulus because these are extraordinary times
[Guest]: we've had, I think, in America. The last time I checked, about 22 million unemployment claims
[Guest]: in the last few weeks since people have started putting in a shelter in place orders and restaurants
[Guest]: and other services have started shutting down and people have lost jobs. But it's a 2 trillion
[Guest]: stimulus and we have to pay for it. And when I say we, I mean the future Shruti Rajgopalan
[Guest]: and the future workers two years from now, three years from now in the American economy
[Guest]: need to pay for this. And there is no clarity on how we came up with this number, whether
[Guest]: it goes to sensible users, 2 trillion in a stimulus for COVID and the related economic
[Guest]: crisis and hardly any of it has gone towards development of vaccines, which frankly is
[Guest]: the only way to get out of this mess. So it's not clear how that money, you know, if the
[Guest]: dollars were put to the best use either. So I'm not an expert on the CARES Act, but there
[Guest]: is another way by which, you know, we've given up or we've ceded a lot of control in these
[Guest]: emergency situations to the government to spend a lot of money without any of us having
[Guest]: a very clear understanding of how we're going to get out of that spending and how we get
[Guest]: out of that situation. And right now, everyone's attitude is, look, it's an emergency. We shouldn't
[Guest]: worry about spending, just print the money. We'll figure it out later. If we don't spend
[Guest]: the money now, there will be no economy to protect or, you know, the people will be dead.
[Guest]: You know, there's all of that chatter and I can sympathize with some of that, but it
[Guest]: does concern me on, you know, how are we going to go back and sort of control the fiscal
[Guest]: excess of the state? So there is the excess in terms of privacy. There is the excess in
[Guest]: terms of, you know, fiscal expenditure. There's also excess in terms of just, you know, police
[Guest]: brutality and things like that happening in India. So we don't know what the appropriate
[Guest]: role of police officer in these circumstances, right? When they say enforce a lockdown, is
[Guest]: the job of the police officer to assist people when they're in distress and want to congregate
[Guest]: or is their job to shut down things, overturn vegetable carts and milkman's trucks and,
[Guest]: you know, sort of start beating people up and doing lathi charges to get them to walk
[Guest]: away from a mandi. You know, we have no clarity on that. My understanding of a police enforcing
[Guest]: a lockdown is we systematically control crowds and have social distancing, but the police
[Guest]: need to help people get the essential things that they want. No one is out and about just
[Guest]: having a good time. The people who are out and about need to be there because they need
[Guest]: to buy vegetables or medicines or milk. So we don't have a good understanding of what
[Guest]: it is. So the police in India is just danda, right? Anyone who comes out in lockdown, we
[Guest]: just beat them up. So these are the sorts of areas where we've ceded too much control
[Guest]: to the government. We're willing to cede it during a lockdown, just not comfortable with
[Amit Varma]: it. Yeah. And my related thoughts, number one, in the context of, you know, ceding a
[Amit Varma]: freedoms, it seems to me that there is also a widespread subject mentality in India. Like
[Amit Varma]: I watch a lot of TikTok and one common meme there is about these people who are saying
[Amit Varma]: ki, shall I go out? I'll go out. Mujhe kuch nahi hoga. And then the guy goes out and he
[Amit Varma]: comes back later and he says mujhe toh kuch nahi hua. And then he turns around and you
[Amit Varma]: realize that his shirt is torn because he's got a lathi beating. And that's completely
[Amit Varma]: okay. Apparently all the police brutality is completely normalized. I mean, I had a
[Amit Varma]: similar experience in my housing society here in Mumbai, where my society secretary got
[Amit Varma]: a call from the nearby police station saying, Hey, the commissioner is going to walk down
[Amit Varma]: the road. Can you organize your society to applaud for him? So on the society WhatsApp
[Amit Varma]: group, they organized everybody to go down and applaud. And a couple of women went out
[Amit Varma]: and showered flowers on the commissioner as he passed by. And that is such an obsequious
[Guest]: sort of display. And yet it's a perfectly rational response in a world where the police
[Guest]: is draconian and will unleash its brute force on you if you don't sort of, you know, acquiesce
[Guest]: and you know, applaud them or give them whatever it is they want, including respect.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. And it was actually rational on the part of the secretary of our society to ask
[Amit Varma]: that people do this because other societies would, and you don't want to be in a situation
[Amit Varma]: where the society needs something tomorrow. And the cops say, Hey, no, but you are those
[Amit Varma]: guys and you didn't help us. That's number one. Number two, you know, in the, and I forget
[Amit Varma]: why this thought came to me in the context of what you were saying, but it's something
[Amit Varma]: that my friend Suyash Rai once said to me, in the context of demonetization, which you
[Amit Varma]: and I have recorded an episode on, but Suyash and I also recorded an episode on, I think
[Amit Varma]: that was, and I would recommend his overmind. They're both at different stages of the thing,
[Amit Varma]: but the point that he made was that whenever, and this is really important and applies to
[Amit Varma]: everything, that whenever you're doing a cost benefit analysis, you need to keep in mind
[Amit Varma]: that your calculation doesn't work if you're talking about costs to one group of people
[Amit Varma]: and benefits to another group of people. And it seems to me that with a lot of this, you
[Amit Varma]: know, throwing money at a problem, you are borrowing from the future to fund present
[Amit Varma]: problems, number one. And number two, there is also a lot of coercion going on in unseen
[Amit Varma]: ways on people who do not see it, but it's going on. And we ignore all those costs and
[Amit Varma]: we think about the assumed benefits. And now coming to that, that's a third point. I was
[Amit Varma]: reading an excellent column by Rathen Roy today, I think, where Rathen made the point
[Amit Varma]: that fiscal stimulus and all is okay, but there is a danger that if you put too much
[Amit Varma]: money in the hands of people, and they don't have goods and services to spend it on, what
[Amit Varma]: you will then have is hyperinflation. And these are very wise words. And this is one
[Amit Varma]: of those sort of downstream effects that we are not taking into account. Now, we are sort
[Amit Varma]: of going with that dogmatic thing that, oh, let's do a fiscal stimulus, we'll put money
[Amit Varma]: in the hands of people, they'll spend it and the economy will bounce back, you know, which
[Amit Varma]: is again thinking like a man of system, where everybody is a piece on a chessboard. But
[Amit Varma]: that's not how the real world and the economy work.
[Guest]: Yeah, so Rathen, I mean, Rathen is an excellent economist, you should get him on the show.
[Guest]: He's really fantastic. He is the director of NIPFP. And he also writes beautifully not
[Guest]: just during the COVID pandemic, but more generally on, you know, fiscal issues, and public finance.
[Guest]: So he's definitely, you know, everyone should read him and his business standard columns,
[Guest]: you should have him on the show. I agree with Rathen in the sense that there are so many
[Guest]: effects. So as you pointed out, again, in the head of the show that you know, there's
[Guest]: no one thing called an essential commodity, right? There's no one thing called a supply
[Guest]: chain, the economy is a beautifully woven web of thousands of decentralized actions.
[Guest]: And if you suppress or control one thing, it's going to pop up in a different unintended
[Guest]: consequence somewhere else. And we need to have a very detailed and nuanced understanding
[Guest]: of the economy, before we just started throwing money from helicopters or giving fiscal stimulus
[Guest]: and things like that. So one area where you know, I mean, I think Rathen and I would agree
[Guest]: is we need to support people at the subsistence level, we need to make sure people are fed.
[Guest]: But I do agree with Rathen that we need to be very careful about broader fiscal stimulus.
[Guest]: It's not clear what money in the hands of people will do if there is an overall contraction
[Guest]: of the economy because of the lockdown, both in terms of aggregate demand and aggregate
[Guest]: supply, right? So that is something we don't have a handle on. We don't know what kind
[Guest]: of contraction we're talking about. We don't know how long it will persist because at this
[Guest]: point, no one knows how long this version of the lockdown will go on, and how the next
[Guest]: opening up of the economy or, you know, easing the lockdown, what exactly it looks like.
[Guest]: So we don't fully have a handle on what the overall economic contraction is. And in those
[Guest]: circumstances, and just waving around, you know, well known tools and just printing more
[Guest]: money and saying this is a war and we should just throw money in a war economy. It doesn't
[Guest]: help anyone. So I do agree with him there.
[Amit Varma]: Right, let's let's move on to, you've written a paper with Alex, where you talk about 10
[Amit Varma]: solutions, what we can do going forward. And you've also spoken in conversations with me
[Amit Varma]: about broad strokes policy solutions, how do we look at India specifically, moving forward,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and I won't even say in a post COVID situation, because I think a post COVID situation,
[Amit Varma]: frankly, is a long way away. This is an ongoing crisis that we are part of, it has, it has
[Amit Varma]: changed our lives forever. I don't think most people realize the extent of the cultural
[Amit Varma]: changes and the economic shift that is going to happen because of this. But what are your
[Amit Varma]: sort of prescriptions going forward?
[Guest]: Yeah, so this is actually prescriptions not even going forward. These are prescriptions
[Guest]: for yesterday. Okay, so we wrote this last week. Alex and I, one of the themes that we
[Guest]: have worked on before, and this is the paper on, you know, premature imitation, and state
[Guest]: capacity in India and the flailing state, which, you know, we recorded a podcast with
[Guest]: you. Our theme has generally been that it is problematic when developing countries just
[Guest]: borrow solutions or best practices from the developed world. Because a lot of those best
[Guest]: practices don't translate and they don't work very well in India. So, you know, the WHO
[Guest]: and all the international organizations say, oh, the best thing that you can do right now
[Guest]: is stay at home, don't meet anyone, wash your hands, you know, be safe and clean. Now we
[Guest]: know in India, most people cannot follow that prescription. And the reason most people cannot
[Guest]: follow that prescription, you know, two or three different reasons. Number one, the average
[Guest]: living space in India per capita is relatively low, right? And this is particularly low in
[Guest]: slums. So the average Indian, you know, per capita space, especially in urban areas, is
[Guest]: about 127 square foot per person, right? That's really low. So it's small. In Mumbai, which
[Guest]: is India's densest city, the average living space per capita is 48 square feet, right?
[Guest]: And our friends at IDFC Institute kindly pointed out that 48 square feet is smaller than an
[Guest]: American prison cell. So that is the kind of tight spaces in which we live. In slums,
[Guest]: that number is close to 30 square feet, right? And then there are things like shifts that
[Guest]: you talked about, which don't work in a lockdown. So we're talking about very low per capita
[Guest]: living space in India, either because urban areas are extremely dense or rural households
[Guest]: have more space, but the size of the household is much bigger. Second, we have intergenerational
[Guest]: cohabitation. So, you know, there's the, you know, the joint family system in India where
[Guest]: the grandparents, grandkids, parents, everyone lives together. So it's very difficult to
[Guest]: social distance. Third is we don't have access to clean sanitation facilities. The worst
[Guest]: example is Dharavi where, you know, four to 500 residents have access to a single toilet
[Guest]: facility out of, you know, the million people living in Dharavi. But the better form of
[Guest]: it is, you know, people who do have a restroom, it's not attached to the dwelling. When it's
[Guest]: attached to the dwelling, you don't get clean piped water. When you get clean piped water,
[Guest]: you don't have it for all day. You know, there are huge water shortages, especially in the
[Guest]: summer, things like that. And because of these reasons, we cannot follow the simple, easy
[Guest]: WHO prescription of wash your hands, stay at home, protect the elders. Right. So we
[Guest]: need special policies for this, for India. So number one, one of the recommendations
[Guest]: we gave was we need to repurpose existing government buildings into quarantine facilities
[Guest]: because we need to actually extract people out of these dense circumstances and put them
[Guest]: somewhere else. And we can't extract individuals. We need to extract the whole family because
[Guest]: the Indian system doesn't allow for one person in the family to get quarantined separately.
[Guest]: It just doesn't work. So one of our suggestions was right now all schools are closed. Right.
[Guest]: And every single district has at least one public school, usually more. And they all
[Guest]: have to have under the RT requirements, they must all have access to water. They must all
[Guest]: have a restroom facility and they must all have a kitchen for the mid day meal. So these
[Guest]: facilities can be very quickly repurposed into quarantine areas where we move entire
[Guest]: families. And this is obviously a short term solution, but it's one of the few policies
[Guest]: that we can actually implement because most Indians cannot follow the social distancing
[Guest]: rules. Another example is, you know, this is very, it sounds very like Mary Antoinette,
[Guest]: but if you can't give clean piped water, give hand sanitizer. Right. Normally in places
[Guest]: like America, we're being told that, hey, hand sanitizer is the superior good. We are
[Guest]: in extreme shortage. Soap and water work great. Please use soap and water in the absence of
[Guest]: hand sanitizer. And I would flip it for India. In India, we need to increase the supply of
[Guest]: hand sanitizer, especially in those, you know, one rupee sachets of two ml each. You know,
[Guest]: those individualized, personalized hand sanitizers that you see everywhere in pharmacies normally
[Guest]: right now, there's a huge shortage. And that is what we need to scale up and distribute
[Guest]: across India, because in the absence of water, you use hand sanitizer. So India needs slightly
[Guest]: different policy mechanisms to deal with this, you know, social distancing and isolation.
[Guest]: So there are some of these things that the government can do. One interesting solution
[Guest]: we gave was right now the hotel industry is down and out. Right. And I'm sure someone
[Guest]: is going to start talking about stimulus and package for the hotel industry and the tourism
[Guest]: industry. Our suggestion was let the government at a subsidized rate, rent private hotel rooms,
[Guest]: you know, relatively low budget and repurpose them into quarantine facilities for, say,
[Guest]: the next two to three months. And this can act as both a stimulus, but it can also get
[Guest]: people out of these very dense situations. And it can use existing capacity, which which
[Guest]: is there in the economy, which is currently debt capital, and it can quickly switch it
[Guest]: around for something that is useful and productive during the crisis. Of course, we suggested
[Guest]: that they rent private hospitals. They don't nationalize them. So I want to put that out.
[Guest]: Again, another simple measure is to wear a mask. Right. The world has been flip flopping
[Guest]: on that. First, experts said masks don't help. Then they said that, you know, using the Hong
[Guest]: Kong and Taiwanese experience, the masks help a lot. So, you know, follow Asia and everyone
[Guest]: should wear a mask. So a month ago in America, they said no one needs to wear a mask. And
[Guest]: today, if you don't wear a mask, the police like literally beat you up, as you saw with
[Guest]: the gentleman in Philadelphia. So, you know, in an ideal world, we would want these N95
[Guest]: masks to be produced and scaled up. But even the regular masks, simple masks made at home
[Guest]: work reasonably well. And, you know, suddenly all our tailors are out of work. And you and
[Guest]: I have friends who, you know, using civil society mechanisms are working with handloom
[Guest]: facilities and tailors to quickly scale up the production of masks and distribute them.
[Guest]: This will both employ tailors and also give masks to the needy. And civil society is doing
[Amit Varma]: this in a way that the government has not yet been able to.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, on our last zoom call of a bunch of friends last weekend, you know, two of
[Amit Varma]: our friends are personally in different cities actually working on these specific initiatives.
[Guest]: So that's civil society.
[Guest]: They're doing it at a big scale already. So and you know, we don't just need two, we need
[Guest]: 2000 of our friends to do this. So it's, it's a wonderful initiative. But those are the
[Guest]: kinds of things we need to think about in the state is finding it very hard to think
[Guest]: about it. So we need to switch it up, you know, civil society can think of some things
[Guest]: and the state can maybe fund all this.
[Guest]: Another was just removing regulatory roadblocks. And, you know, I mean, you and I have had
[Guest]: hundreds of conversations over the last decade on the kinds of regulatory roadblocks that
[Guest]: exist in India, but one of them is just approvals, right? So the state has tight controls on
[Guest]: all kinds of approvals. So for instance, they remove the import duties on testing, but the
[Guest]: Institute of virology needs to approve any test kit before it is deployed. And the drug
[Guest]: controller needs to approve any important test kit before it can be deployed, right?
[Guest]: And most firms have one or the other, they either have the license from the drug controller
[Guest]: or they have the approval from the Institute of virology, they don't have both. So one
[Guest]: of our suggestions was any test kit that's been approved in China, Japan, Singapore,
[Guest]: United States, South Korea, Japan, Western Europe, just approve it in India already,
[Guest]: right? There are countries with far better state capacity with far better regulatory
[Guest]: capacity, which have looked into these and which have approved them. There are Indian
[Guest]: firms which are exporting to these countries, but cannot sell in India because their approvals
[Guest]: are stuck. The Financial Times did a great piece on that. So we need to remove regulatory
[Guest]: roadblocks very quickly. And I would say there's a great time to piggyback on state capacity
[Guest]: of other countries. Tying in with this is removing import tariffs on medical equipment.
[Guest]: Of course, you and I think we should remove import tariffs on everything, but the urgent
[Guest]: need is medical equipment. And we talked about private Indian labs running tests for which
[Guest]: the government can reimburse at least to cover costs, even if they don't cover the profits.
[Guest]: So these are the sorts of recommendations that we made, which are very specific to the
[Guest]: Indian system. Another important tool is mobile phones. And now you and I have spoken about
[Guest]: this in the past on how the mobile phone revolution in India helped India skip an entire stage
[Guest]: of development. You and I come from a generation where we remember that you had to wait for
[Guest]: four or five years to get an MTNL telephone line, right? And the moment they liberalized
[Guest]: the telecom sector, you could get, you know, landlines much easier. And then when the mobile
[Guest]: phone revolution came, hundreds of millions of Indians just completely bypassed the landline
[Guest]: stage and went straight to mobile phones. Now, as a consequence, an incredible thing
[Guest]: that's happened in India is two thirds of Indians either have their own mobile phone
[Guest]: or have access to a mobile phone within the household. And about a quarter of Indians
[Guest]: have smartphones with data, right? Now, this can be deployed in a big way when we are talking
[Guest]: about testing and tracing. Now, I'd like this to be done as much on a voluntary basis as
[Guest]: possible with as little state coercion. But I think there is some element of state coercion
[Guest]: when it comes to contact tracing and taking down people's, you know, travel histories
[Guest]: and personal histories. So you can use mobile phones. For instance, I know a couple of people
[Guest]: who are already doing this, and these are private ventures. They are not hoping to make
[Guest]: any money. In fact, one of the people I know who's doing this, young boy, 17 years old
[Guest]: called Sohail Mohammed. He's an Emergent Ventures winner. And he created a diagnostic app in
[Guest]: Kannada and English initially because he's a resident of Mysore. And you just take the
[Guest]: test and it tells you, you know, you put in all your symptoms and it tells you whether
[Guest]: you're at a high or a low risk of COVID and whether you should isolate and you should,
[Guest]: you know, go look for a test or something like that. Now, it has two benefits. One,
[Guest]: it provides information to people and provides information in local languages to an easy
[Guest]: instrument that people can use and people can sort of use their phone and they can follow.
[Guest]: The other is if you take permission of these people, and I'm not, I don't know exactly
[Guest]: the technical details of his particular app. But if you take the permission of people and
[Guest]: say, can we use your location data, not individualized, but anonymized, then depending on how many
[Guest]: people in a particular district have taken a particular diagnostic test, you can figure
[Guest]: out even before an outbreak in the community on whether that is a hotspot displaying certain
[Guest]: symptoms in large numbers, right? So mobile phones can be deployed in a very interesting
[Guest]: way. Mobile phones were deployed in Vietnam. The government introduced its own app and
[Guest]: two thirds of Vietnamese people have access to the internet and to mobile phones and through
[Guest]: Facebook and a number of, you know, local initiatives, they had a huge public outreach
[Guest]: explaining what is the meaning of the coronavirus epidemic, how does it spread, how people can
[Guest]: be asymptomatic, but still infect other people and what kind of precautions should be taken.
[Guest]: And they incentivize people to give information on a voluntary basis, right? And those sorts
[Guest]: of things are extremely important, especially given that we are not able to test on a large
[Guest]: scale. So mobile phones can be used to screen. So one of our suggestions was it would be
[Guest]: great if we can keep mobile phone accounts alive and allow mobile phone companies to
[Guest]: use the 2% CSR that they are supposed to spend, you know, mandated by law towards helping
[Guest]: people in distress to keep their mobile phones switched on, because that's a great way of
[Guest]: reaching information to people and also collecting information from people. So we just came up
[Guest]: with, you know, a list of 10 recommendations. This is in no way an exhaustive list, but
[Guest]: it's just a basic list of things that are very India specific and very developing country
[Guest]: specific that need to be accounted for when you're thinking of, you know, COVID policy
[Guest]: during a lockdown.
[Amit Varma]: And it'll be linked from the show notes, obviously. I mean, a couple of, I mean, the related worry
[Amit Varma]: I have is that, of course, you know, the seductions of technology can often lead us to, even at
[Amit Varma]: a voluntary basis, sign away freedoms without being aware of what could lie down the road
[Amit Varma]: in a different time. And that's really the only thing that I worry about as far as privacy
[Amit Varma]: is concerned. And I'm with you on that. And I'm also a little worried about and I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I could actually frame it as a question to you, that, you know, it is also seductive
[Amit Varma]: to be able to use all the tools of your trade and then adopt an engineering mindset. Like
[Amit Varma]: I think the greatest danger to India, frankly, is the engineering mindset where you try to
[Amit Varma]: fix everything from the top down and design things. And, you know, or the man of system
[Amit Varma]: as, or the woman of system, as Adam Smith would have said, if he was women would never
[Amit Varma]: do such a thing, would never do such a thing. So that's a joke, people. The person of system,
[Amit Varma]: how do you watch out for that tendency in yourself? Because very often, you have a lot
[Amit Varma]: of intricate knowledge about how a system works. You also know at a broader level that
[Amit Varma]: look, this is spontaneous order, I can't control all of this. I can't design all of this, I
[Amit Varma]: must not fall for the fatal conceit. But there is also then that confidence. And if I may
[Amit Varma]: say it, perhaps sometimes that arrogance of that intricate knowledge. So how do you watch
[Guest]: out for your tendency in yourself? So one excellent thing for me personally, is that
[Guest]: I have zero power and influence on any policies actually being implemented. So that is the
[Guest]: greatest check on any hubris or arrogance I may have. I can write purely from a point
[Guest]: of view of educating myself and educating other people. And thinking through the economic
[Guest]: logic and incentives of a particular situation. Knowing full well that I have very little
[Guest]: influence or control over policy. So that's a great check, you know, on my humility overall.
[Guest]: Another is, like I said, I always veer towards voluntary action as opposed to coercive action.
[Guest]: Because that is an ideological preference and a personal preference of mine.
[Guest]: I would say it's a moral preference.
[Guest]: It's a moral preference, but it's also something I don't know if I ever cultivated it or if
[Guest]: I was just always like this. So it's not like I'm trying to be like this. I just fundamentally
[Guest]: have a preference towards very low coercion as far as possible to avoid it and as far
[Guest]: as possible rely on voluntary arrangements. So, you know, that also helps me a little
[Guest]: bit. When it comes to the stuff like, you know, we're recommending mobile testing and
[Guest]: things like that, I would say the third aspect is my two checks are always it needs to be
[Guest]: incentive aligned and it needs to tap into as much local information as possible. Right?
[Guest]: So this mobile phone testing, while it seems like an engineering tech solution, it is really
[Guest]: the success or failure of it depends on bottom up information coming from various decentralized
[Guest]: actors. And if people are not willing to participate in this, then the whole thing, you know, you
[Guest]: can have as many mobile phones as you want. It's not going to do anything. Right. And
[Guest]: the man of system government thing has to do nothing short of 100% invasive surveillance
[Guest]: to substitute for that decentralized information to get any traction to, you know, instead
[Guest]: of testing. So these are some of the checks that are in place. I'm not claiming that I
[Guest]: get any of it right all the time. But I think just having a huge preference towards voluntary
[Guest]: action keeps my power hungry side in check. Not that that side is being fed at all. I
[Guest]: don't even have power when it comes to my dog in my house. So, you know, that's kind
[Guest]: of my status on the totem pole. So I think that's usually what keeps me in check. But
[Guest]: I think it's very important to worry about certain things. I think reading history helps,
[Guest]: you know, thinking about what happens when we cede a lot of power to the government during
[Guest]: war or during other emergencies. That helps a lot. Understanding the kinds of things that
[Guest]: you have talked about, which is, you know, there is a lot of inertia in government and
[Guest]: anytime we roll out a new government program, it's very difficult to roll it back. So what
[Guest]: kinds of ways do we, you know, what are the methods we use to make sure that temporary
[Guest]: relief or temporary use of draconian power do not persist in the long term? And these
[Guest]: are just lessons. It's not like I knew this all along. It's just something you learn from
[Guest]: reading a lot of history. So I think just reading the kinds of things I have read, you
[Guest]: know, over a period of time, which is world history, lessons from Indian political economy,
[Guest]: the kinds of draconian measures Indira Gandhi took during the emergency, whether it is forced
[Guest]: sterilization, slum demolition. These are just lessons for us that we must just never
[Guest]: forget. So I guess having a good memory on things that happened long before I was born
[Guest]: and thinking about them constantly helps, too. So those are some of the checks. But
[Guest]: I don't think any of us, you know, only people who believe no action should be taken in any
[Guest]: circumstance can be completely protected from, you know, veering into engineering mindset
[Amit Varma]: from time to time. Fair enough. That's a good point. And you know, what do you say about
[Amit Varma]: learning from history? Well, look, Indians, firstly, do not learn from history. And secondly,
[Amit Varma]: they don't read history. And secondly, we use the tools of WhatsApp University to manufacture
[Amit Varma]: our own history according to the lessons we want to learn. These are dark and depressing
[Amit Varma]: times for more reasons than just COVID-19. And, you know, on this, I have to say, I'm
[Guest]: going to throw the Indian elite under the bus because they have been one of the greatest
[Guest]: disappointments for me in recent times. We were talking about all the areas in India
[Guest]: which are rendered invisible. A lot of it is because Indian elite just carry on business
[Guest]: as usual and don't apply themselves and their influence enough. So one huge area is how
[Guest]: we treat essential workers. So, you know, we want our cities to be clean. We want our
[Guest]: bathrooms to be clean. We want the sewage system to be cleared. We want the garbage
[Guest]: to be picked up. But we never acknowledge who are the people who are actually doing
[Guest]: this work. Even right now, everyone is clapping for people who are doctors and nurses who
[Guest]: are still people of relatively privileged positions. But you and I have discussed this
[Guest]: before a disproportionate percentage of our health and sanitation workers, especially
[Guest]: the sanitation workers, are Dalits. And there is zero acknowledgement for them. There is
[Guest]: zero increase in their pay. We don't believe in paying them overtime because they're working
[Guest]: overtime right now. They're not acknowledged as an essential service. We've read reports
[Guest]: of, you know, Dalit sanitation workers going to work who get beaten up on their way to
[Guest]: work. We simply don't treat people well. Right. So same thing with slum dwellers. We've created
[Guest]: a slum problem because of the nimbyism of the elites. Right. Even in Mumbai, routinely
[Guest]: people will say, but you know, if we increase the FSI, there's going to be too much overcrowding
[Guest]: and we won't get enough water and parking. And in the process, you know, we limit the
[Guest]: FSI and we get slums. And every single one of these elites there, the bhai who comes
[Guest]: to work in the house to clean it, or the garbage man who comes to pick things up, or the auto
[Guest]: rickshaw driver who takes them everywhere, they all live in these slums. You know, the
[Guest]: taxi driver Kumar spoke to is living in slums and shifts. And we just look the other way
[Guest]: making these people and their problems invisible. So in that sense, I think the elites right
[Guest]: now for the first time, we're talking about Indian husbands, chopping vegetables at home.
[Guest]: There's a whole thing on TikTok and Instagram on, you know, how people's rotis are getting
[Guest]: burned and they don't know how to cook. It's simply because we never paid any acknowledgement
[Guest]: to essential workers who do the bulk of the unpleasant jobs in our society. And we've
[Guest]: never created mechanisms to support them. We've rendered them invisible. And now we're
[Guest]: like, Oh, how do I manage without a bhai? You know, how do we manage without the garbage
[Guest]: getting picked up or the milkman, you know, delivering milk. So the Indian elite really
[Guest]: need to step it up. Okay. And routinely we have the Indian elite who, you know, I've
[Guest]: been watching this on Twitter all the time. As you know, the first super spreader event
[Guest]: just happened to be a Muslim congregation. It could have been anybody, right? This was
[Guest]: a pure chance, according to me, you know, in, in the timeline of things, but it was
[Guest]: a super spreader event. And now suddenly we have Indian elites just outraging against
[Guest]: Muslims on Twitter, as if Corona virus is a Muslim created problem. And, you know, like
[Guest]: telling the government that the policeman to use as draconian measures as possible,
[Guest]: saying things like, we need to beat them up. We need to put them in prison. We need to
[Guest]: isolate them, you know? So it's like the Indian elite is a little too comfortable giving up
[Guest]: more and more part of the government because they're very comfortable in the knowledge
[Guest]: that the abuse of that power is always only against people who are already marginalized.
[Guest]: And for this, you know, the Indian elite has to just be blamed and thrown out of the bus,
[Guest]: especially the middle class. So I have suddenly in this COVID crisis, a very bad taste in,
[Guest]: in my mouth because of everything I read, written by them on Twitter and TikTok and
[Guest]: places like that. I don't know what your thought is on this.
[Amit Varma]: No, I agree with you entirely. These are very wise and sad thoughts, though. I'd say that
[Guest]: it's a rant, but we'll turn them into wise and sad thoughts. That's what we do in podcast
[Amit Varma]: rant on any other medium is a wise thought on a podcast. So I will say one thing about
[Amit Varma]: TikTok that I've actually watched thousands of TikTok videos over the last few days. And
[Amit Varma]: I think got a better, much better sense of my society from it. And there is not only
[Amit Varma]: cause for despair, but some cause for hope. And I'll end on the note that I actually,
[Amit Varma]: you know, listening to your words, I thought to myself that I wish Indian society was a
[Amit Varma]: little bit more like the coronavirus, because the coronavirus does not discriminate. Shruti,
[Amit Varma]: thank you so much for coming on the show.
[Guest]: Thanks so much for having me, Amit. It was really nice chatting with you. I mean, normally
[Guest]: we do this face to face after you fed me a lovely Bengali meal at OCalcutta across the
[Guest]: street from your studio where we used to record. But in these times when I don't know when
[Guest]: I'll see you next, it is just really nice to be still be able to talk to you.
[Amit Varma]: Social distancing Zindabad, online connecting Zindabad.
[Unknown]: Privilege to Zindabad.
[Amit Varma]: If you like listening to this episode, do follow Shruti on Twitter at S Rajgopalan.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A M I T V A R M A. You can browse past episodes of
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Scene and the Unseen? If so, would you like to support
[Amit Varma]: the production of the show? You can go over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute
[Amit Varma]: any amount you like to keep this podcast alive and kicking. Thank you.